202010::congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the CYP11B1 gene (610613) on chromosome 8q24.|Congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder of corticosteroid biosynthesis resulting in androgen excess, virilization, and hypertension. The defect causes decreased synthesis of cortisol and corticosterone in the zona fasciculata of the adrenal gland, resulting in accumulation of the precursors 11-deoxycortisol and 11-deoxycorticosterone; the latter is a potent salt-retaining mineralocorticoid that leads to arterial hypertension (White et al., 1991). |CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency accounts for approximately 5 to 8% of all CAH cases; approximately 90% of cases are caused by 21-hydroxylase deficiency (201910) (White et al., 1991). |The nature of the defect in congenital adrenal hyperplasia associated with hypertension was first demonstrated by Eberlein and Bongiovanni (1956) on the basis of the accumulated steroids.|Glenthoj et al. (1980) diagnosed 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency in 3 adult patients who had been thought to have 21-hydroxylase deficiency. |Rosler et al. (1982) reported 26 patients with CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency in 18 Jewish families from Morocco, Tunis, Turkey, and Iran. Parental consanguinity was found in 7 families. Patients had severe volume-induced hypertension with low levels of plasma renin activity. Affected females showed a wide range in the clinical expression of androgen excess, ranging from enlarged clitoris to penile urethra with fused labial-scrotal folds. Ten of 14 females were reared as males and diagnosis was often delayed until puberty when breasts developed and menses occurred. Signs of mineralocorticoid excess and degree of virilization were not correlated. Hypertension leading to fatal vascular accidents was observed in only mildly virilized patients, and complete pseudohermaphrodites were sometimes normotensive. Six patients had overt hypokalemia. |Hochberg et al. (1985) observed 15 affected girls and 9 affected boys, all Jewish individuals of Moroccan and Iranian extraction. Final height was severely compromised in all, regardless of age at diagnosis and quality of therapeutic control. Onset of puberty was precocious in males and normal in females. Gynecomastia, very unusual in male infants after 1 month, was present in 4 at diagnosis. All were being raised as males, although 2 were karyotypic females. Hydrocortisone acetate was superior to cortisone acetate or prednisone in promotion of growth. |Rosler et al. (1992) reviewed the characteristics of 38 persons with 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency from 25 families over a 39-year period; 19 families came from Morocco, and in another 2 of the families one parent came from Morocco. |Helmberg et al. (1992) reported an 8-year-old boy of Turkish origin, born of consanguineous parents, with CAH due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency. The patient had marked hypertension, precocious pseudopuberty, height and weight above the 97th percentile, epiphyseals already completely closed, and completely virilized intersexual genitalia (Prader type IV, penis with hypospadias, scrotum lacking palpable testes) with a 46,XX karyotype. Ultrasound examination disclosed adrenal hyperplasia and the existence of a uterus and vagina ending in the proximal urethra. Four sibs of the patient died shortly after birth or in early childhood. |Al-Jurayyan (1995) reported that 78 Saudi children with CAH were seen at a hospital in Riyadh over a 10-year period. Of these, 20 (25.6%) patients from 11 families had 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency. Pseudoprecocious puberty in males and variable degrees of virilization in females led to wrong sex assignment in 7 (58.3%). Neonatal salt-wasting before treatment occurred in 3. Moderate to severe hypertension associated with hypokalemia was present in another 6. In 4 sibs, hypertension persisted despite adequate hydrocortisone therapy. Al-Jurayyan (1995) observed that the disorder appeared to be relatively frequent in the Saudi Arabian population. |Clark (2000) presented 2 patients with what she called 'nonclassic' or 'partial/mild' 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency that differed by less frequent prenatal virilization and hypertension compared to the classic form. The first child was a 6-year-old boy referred for precocious puberty. He was tall (95th percentile) and had high-normal blood pressure (90th percentile for age) and Tanner III genitalia. Skeletal age was approximately twice chronologic age. The serum level of 11-deoxycortisol was elevated, as was the level of tetrahydro substance S, a metabolite. The second child was a 1-month-old girl with an enlarged clitoris but no labial fusion. She had normal blood pressure for age. Serum 11-deoxycortisol was markedly elevated. |
616034::of evidence that 2,4-dienoyl-CoA reductase deficiency (DECRD) is caused by homozygous mutation in the NADK2 gene (615787) on chromosome 5p13. One such patient has been reported.|DECR deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism resulting in mitochondrial dysfunction. Affected individuals have a severe encephalopathy with neurologic and metabolic dysfunction beginning in early infancy. Laboratory studies show decreased activity of the mitochondrial NADP(H)-dependent enzymes DECR1 (222745) and AASS (605113), resulting in increased C10:2-carnitine levels and hyperlysinemia (summary by Houten et al., 2014). |In a black female infant presenting in the neonatal period with persistent hypotonia, Roe et al. (1990) found deficiency of 2,4-dienoyl-coenzyme A reductase. Biochemical studies had shown hyperlysinemia, hypocarnitinemia, a normal organic acid profile, and an unusual acylcarnitine species in both urine and blood. The latter metabolite was identified by mass spectrometry as 2-trans,4-cis-decadienoylcarnitine, derived from incomplete oxidation of linoleic acid. In spite of dietary therapy, the patient died of respiratory acidosis at 4 months of age. Samples of liver and muscle taken at autopsy showed that the level of 2,4-dienoyl-coenzyme A reductase activity was 40% of the control value in liver and only 17% of that found in normal muscle. Roe et al. (1990) stated that this was the first report of a patient with an enzyme defect related only to unsaturated fatty acid oxidation.|Houten et al. (2014) reported a male infant, born of unrelated Hispanic parents, who presented at 8 weeks of age with failure to thrive, microcephaly, central hypotonia, and mild dysmorphic features. Metabolic studies showed increased plasma C10:2-carnitine, low free carnitine, and increased lysine in plasma, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and urine. Blood and CSF lactate were also increased. Urinary organic acids showed several abnormalities consistent with mitochondrial dysfunction. Over the next few years, he showed little developmental progress and had multiple neurologic problems, including nystagmus, hypertonia, clonus, choreoathetosis, dystonia, spastic quadriplegia, cortical blindness, epilepsy, and episodic central apnea, all consistent with severe encephalopathy. Additional features included pancreatitis and renal tubular acidosis. Brain imaging showed progressive leukodystrophy, generalized cerebral atrophy, enlarged ventricles, and T2-weighted abnormalities in the basal ganglia. He died at age 5 years of aspiration pneumonia. Residual DECR activity was 10% in the lysate of patient fibroblasts, but no mutations were identified in the DECR1 gene. |
204750::2-aminoadipic 2-oxoadipic aciduria (AMOXAD) is caused by compound heterozygous mutation in the DHTKD1 gene (614984) on chromosome 10p14.|In the course of routine screening, Fischer et al. (1974) observed alpha-aminoadipic aciduria in 2 brothers, aged 9 and 10 years. They attributed it to a defect in lysine metabolism. One had slight mental retardation (IQ 86), but the authors doubted a relation to the metabolic variant. Alpha-aminoadipicacid is COOH-CH(NH2)3-COOH. See ketoadipic aciduria (245130). Lormans and Lowenthal (1974) described the same condition in a 6-year-old boy with mental retardation. Alpha-aminoadipic acid is an intermediate in the breakdown of lysine. It is metabolized to alpha-ketoadipic acid and ultimately to acetoacetyl CoA via glutaryl CoA. Fischer and Brown (1980) studied tryptophan and lysine metabolism. |Danhauser et al. (2012) stated that over 20 individuals with 2-aminoadipic 2-oxoadipic aciduria were known. More than half of them were asymptomatic, whereas others had mild to severe intellectual disability, muscular hypotonia, developmental delay, ataxia, and epilepsy, as reported by Przyrembel et al. (1975) and Duran et al. (1984). Danhauser et al. (2012) reported 2 additional individuals, unrelated girls born to nonconsanguineous parents after uneventful pregnancies and deliveries. The first patient had moderately delayed psychomotor development (sitting alone at 10 months and walking alone at 25 months) in infancy, which was improved with physiotherapy and occupational therapy. At 2 years of age she had elevated 2-oxoadipic acid (range, 10 to 120 mmol/mol creatinine) and 2-hydroxyadipic acid (range, 5 to 40 mmol/mol creatinine) in her urine. These metabolites are usually not present in urine. The plasma concentration of 2-aminoadipic acid was also elevated (120 mmol/mol per liter). A protein-restricted diet did not improve her course and MRI was normal. At the age of 8 testing showed an IQ of 117; at age 11 she was diagnosed with ADHD; and at 14 years of age she was in good health, attending regular school, and following a normal diet with a normal neurologic exam. The second individual presented with microcephaly, mild motor developmental delay (sitting alone at age 9 months and walking alone at the age 22 months), and prominent speech delay in early childhood. Her hearing was normal. At 2 years of age metabolic analysis of urine and plasma revealed the characteristic biochemical profile of 2-aminoadipic 2-oxoadipic aciduria (2-oxoadipate, 520-970 mmol/mol creatinine; 2-hydroxyadipate, 100-150 mmol/mol creatinine; 2-aminoadipate, elevated). Protein restriction did not affect the course. At the age of 12 years, she still had significant problems with expressive and receptive language (limited active and passive vocabulary, dyslalia, and dysgrammatism). Her IQ was 87. She had mild muscular hypotonia and an otherwise normal neurologic exam. |
245130::Bremer et al. (1976) described a female infant (the offspring of a probably incestuous mating of a mentally retarded mother) who was a typical 'collodion baby.' The skin cleared, but retarded development and floppiness with edema of the dorsum of the hands and feet later became evident. The mother was said to have shown similar features as a baby. The urine showed alpha-ketoadipicacid (COOH-CH(O)-(CH2)3-COOH). The infant's fibroblasts showed a defect in degradation of alpha-ketoadipicacid. The mother also secreted this substance in the urine. This may be an instance of pseudodominance. See aminoadipicaciduria (204750).|
203740::Kohlschutter et al. (1982) reported a case of partial alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase deficiency in 2 sibs of a consanguineous Tunisian family. In addition to genetic defects of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, other mechanisms for recessively inherited congenital lactic acidosis include inborn errors of pyruvate metabolism and inborn errors of oxidative phosphorylation. |Guffon et al. (1993) described a brother and sister, born to consanguineous Portuguese parents, with 2-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase deficiency. Axial hypotonia with no head control as late as age 4 years was described in both. Metabolic acidosis with acute episodes of acidotic decompensation and sometimes hypoglycemia occurred during infections. The sister died suddenly after a general anesthesia. |Alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase deficiency is sometimes a feature of DLD deficiency (DDLD; 246900).|
300438::HSD10 mitochondrial disease (HSD10MD) is caused by hemizygous or heterozygous mutation in the HSD17B10 gene (300256) on chromosome Xp11.|HSD10 mitochondrial disease most commonly presents as an X-linked neurodegenerative disorder with highly variable severity and age at onset ranging from the neonatal period to early childhood. The features are usually multisystemic, consistent with mitochondrial dysfunction. Some affected males have a severe infantile form associated with cardiomyopathy that may result in death in early childhood, whereas other rare patients may have juvenile onset or even atypical presentations with normal neurologic development. More severely affected males show developmental regression in infancy or early childhood, often associated with early-onset intractable seizures, progressive choreoathetosis and spastic tetraplegia, optic atrophy or retinal degeneration resulting in visual loss, and mental retardation. Heterozygous females may show non-progressive developmental delay and intellectual disability, but may also be clinically normal. Although the diagnosis can be aided by the observation of increased urinary levels of metabolites of isoleucine breakdown (2-methyl-3 hydroxybutyrate and tiglylglycine), there is not a correlation between these laboratory features and the phenotype. In addition, patients do not develop severe metabolic crises in the neonatal period as observed in other organic acidurias, but may show persistent lactic acidosis, most likely reflecting mitochondrial dysfunction (summary by Rauschenberger et al., 2010; review by Zschocke, 2012). |In a review of the disorder, Zschocke (2012) noted that although this disorder was originally thought to be an inborn error of branched-chain fatty acid and isoleucine metabolism resulting from decreased HSD17B10 dehydrogenase activity (HSD17B10 'deficiency'), subsequent studies have shown that the HSD17B10 gene product has additional functions and also acts as a component of the mitochondrial RNase P holoenzyme, which is involved in mitochondrial tRNA processing and maturation and ultimately mitochondrial protein synthesis. The multisystemic features of HSD10MD most likely result from the adverse effect of HSD17B10 mutations on mitochondrial function, rather than from the effects on the dehydrogenase activity (see PATHOGENESIS below). |Zschocke et al. (2000) reported a male patient who was born at term and recovered well from an episode of metabolic decompensation and lactic acidosis. Psychomotor development was only moderately delayed at age 1 year, but he subsequently showed a gradual loss of mental and motor skills, which progressed with profound developmental regression, choreoathetosis, near blindness, and epilepsy. Brain MRI showed a slight frontotemporal atrophy. Urinary organic acid analysis revealed marked excretion of tiglylglycine and 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyrate. Enzyme studies showed a virtually complete absence of MHBD activity. Zschocke (2012) stated that dietary changes in the patient reported by Zschocke et al. (2000) did not prevent progression of the disorder, suggesting that reduction of isoleucine metabolites is of no benefit in HSD10MD. |Ensenauer et al. (2002) reported two 7-year-old patients (one male and one female) with the disorder. The male had progressive neurodegenerative symptoms, and the female had psychomotor retardation without loss of developmental milestones. A short-term biochemical response to an isoleucine-restricted diet was reported in both children. |Olpin et al. (2002) reported a 23-year-old man with 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency with a very mild clinical course. He had apparently normal early development and remained relatively well until the age of 6 years, when he contracted measles. Following that illness, his motor skills and school progress deteriorated. At 15 years he had significant dysarthria and generalized rigidity with some dystonic and unusual posturing. He was then treated with a low protein high carbohydrate diet with a good response in terms of balance and gait. At 18 years he was treated with benzhexol, increased slowly from 2 mg to 6 mg daily, which resulted in improvement in tremor and dystonia. At 23 years he could dress himself and worked in sheltered employment but remained severely dysarthric. |Sass et al. (2004) described an affected male who, in contrast to the first published case (Zschocke et al., 2000), did not present with neonatal metabolic decompensation, but rather showed essentially normal development through most of his first year of life. Like patient 2 in the report of Ensenauer et al. (2002), he showed development of cerebral atrophy including symmetric alterations of the basal ganglia beginning after the age of 1 year. |Perez-Cerda et al. (2005) reported 3 patients with MHBD deficiency from 2 unrelated Spanish families. In the first family, a girl presented with psychomotor delay from the first months of life and later showed ataxic gait, speech delay, and sensorineural deafness. She also showed episodes of myoclonus during stress. Cultured fibroblasts showed intermediate MHBD activity at 3.8 nmol/min/mg protein (control value of 7.1). She was started on a low-protein, isoleucine-restricted diet and showed moderate psychomotor retardation at age 10 years. A younger affected brother died during the neonatal period from lactic acidosis. Both patients and their asymptomatic mother carried a mutation in the HSD17B10 gene (300256.0003). In the second family, a boy presented in the neonatal period with hypotonia, dehydration, and horizontal nystagmus. He later developed myoclonus and brain MRI showed frontotemporal atrophy. MHBD activity was severely decreased at 0.8 nmol/min/mg protein. Genetic analysis revealed a mutation in the HSD17B10 gene (300256.0001), which was also found in his mother who had borderline learning difficulties. Despite institution of an isoleucine-restricted diet, the patient died at age 18 months. All 3 patients had increased urinary 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA. In a review of previously reported patients, Perez-Cerda et al. (2005) noted that the most common clinical symptom was speech delay. Affected males followed a severe neurodegenerative course with psychomotor regression, whereas females showed mild to moderate developmental delay. |Seaver et al. (2011) reported a 10-year-old boy of mixed ancestry, including East Asian descent, with HSD10MD. The patient had normal early development, but showed developmental regression around age 2 to 3 years. Gait became unsteady around age 3 to 4 years, and he developed a hyperkinetic involuntary movement disorder. Around this time, he also developed severe refractory seizures, which varied in type. He had poor overall growth, moderate cognitive impairment, and mild impairment in social interactions; he attended school in a self-contained special education setting. Brain imaging was normal. He had no episodes of metabolic decompensation or metabolic acidosis. Mitochondrial electron transport chain enzyme activities in fibroblasts were normal. |Falk et al. (2016) reported a 14-year-old Caucasian boy with onset of intractable epilepsy around 2.5 years of age, followed by developmental regression, loss of ability to walk or sit unassisted, choreoathetotic movements, progressive spastic tetraparesis, and static encephalopathy. Additional features included optic nerve atrophy with visual loss, nystagmus, lack of speech, gastrointestinal dysmotility necessitating tube feeding, urinary dysfunction, drooling, dysphagia, and chronic lactic acidemia, all suggestive of a multisystem mitochondrial disorder. Brain imaging showed diffuse cerebral atrophy. Muscle biopsy was suggestive of a mitochondrial myopathy with increased lipid content, abnormal mitochondrial histology, and mitochondrial proliferation. Mitochondrial respiratory chain enzyme activities were decreased compared to controls. Family history revealed 2 maternal half-uncles with suspected mitochondrial disease and seizures resulting in death in early childhood; no tissue or DNA was available from the uncles. |Reyniers et al. (1999) described a 'new' neurologic syndrome in 5 male patients from a 4-generation Luxembourg family. The features were mild mental retardation with choreoathetosis and abnormal behavior. Choreoathetosis, the most distinguishing feature in these 5 patients, was characterized by involuntary, irregular, purposeless, nonrhythmic, abrupt, rapid movements flowing from one part of the body to another (chorea) that blend with slow, writhing, continuous movements (athetosis). Behavioral abnormalities in these patients involved aggressiveness and agitation in the proband and hallucinations and automutilation in 3 of the proband's great-uncles, as well as speech impairment. In relation to the proband it was stated that 'except for arachnodactily (sic), he did not show any dysmorphic features.' In relation to 1 or more of the great-uncles, it was stated that 'dysmorphic features were restricted to arachnodactily (sic).' The pedigree pattern strongly suggested X-linked recessive inheritance. |Rauschenberger et al. (2010) reported a boy with HSD10MD who presented with pre- and postnatal failure to thrive, but normal cognitive and motor development. Neurologic examination in this boy and 2 affected relatives was normal up to age 8 years. Molecular studies identified a hemizygous Q165H mutation in the HSD17B10 gene that was located in the active center of the enzyme, and patient fibroblasts had no measurable HSD17B10 dehydrogenase activity and no binding to the NADH or NAD cofactor. The findings expanded the phenotype associated with HSD17B10 mutations and demonstrated a lack of correlation between disease severity and residual enzyme activity in these patients. |
201910::this form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the CYP21A2 gene (613815), encoding steroid 21-hydroxylase, on chromosome 6p21.|Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) results from a deficiency in one or another of the enzymes of cortisol biosynthesis. In about 95% of cases, 21-hydroxylation is impaired in the zona fasciculata of the adrenal cortex so that 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP) is not converted to 11-deoxycortisol. Because of defective cortisol synthesis, ACTH levels increase, resulting in overproduction and accumulation of cortisol precursors, particularly 17-OHP, proximal to the block. This causes excessive production of androgens, resulting in virilization.|Slominski et al. (1996) presented evidence that the CYP21A2, CYP11A1 (118485), CYP17 (609300), and ACTHR (202200) genes are expressed in skin (see 202200). The authors suggested that expression of these genes may play a role in skin physiology and pathology and that cutaneous proopiomelanocortin activity may be autoregulated by a feedback mechanism involving glucocorticoids synthesized locally. |There are 4 recognized clinical forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, the majority of cases being associated with 21-hydroxylase deficiency: salt-wasting (SW), simple virilizing (SV), nonclassic (NC) late-onset (also called attenuated and acquired), and cryptic. All 4 forms are closely linked to HLA and represent the effects of various combinations of alleles.|In female newborns, the external genitalia are masculinized; gonads and internal genitalia are normal. Postnatally, untreated males as well as females may manifest rapid growth, penile or clitoral enlargement, precocious adrenarche, and ultimately early epiphyseal closure and short stature. A mild form of late-onset adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency can occur in adults and has hirsutism as the only manifestation in the most attenuated form.|All types of adrenal hyperplasia were reviewed exhaustively by Bongiovanni and Root (1963). Prader et al. (1962) reported an enormous interlocking Swiss kindred. (See precocious puberty (176400) for a simulating condition.) |Galal et al. (1968) concluded that the 2 clinical forms of 21-hydroxylase deficiency (with and without salt loss) correlate with the extent of the defect in the cortisol pathway. Some had suggested the existence of 2 different 21-hydroxylating systems, one specific for progesterone and concerned with aldosterone synthesis and the other specific for 17-alpha-hydroxyprogesterone involved in cortisol synthesis. However, Orta-Flores et al. (1976) presented evidence that there is only one 21-hydroxylation system with 2 active sites: one active on progesterone only and a second active on either substrate indiscriminately. The authors suggested that both sites are defective in the salt-losing variety and only the second in the non-salt-losing form. |Presentation with gynecomastia and bilateral testicular masses was reported by Kadair et al. (1977) in a case of 21-hydroxylase deficiency. Others have reported bilateral testicular tumors. Lewis et al. (1968) found that intelligence is increased in the adrenogenital syndrome, a remarkable and possibly significant feature from the point of view of selection and gene frequency. However, McGuire and Omenn (1975) presented data indicating that patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia do not have higher IQs than expected from the family background. Wenzel et al. (1978) found similar results. |Blankstein et al. (1980) reported a possible allelic form of 21-hydroxylase deficiency in 2 sisters, aged 28 and 30 years, who had primary infertility and mild hirsutism but normal puberty, regular menses, and normal female sexual characteristics. Two sibs were normal. The affected sibs were HLA-identical; their healthy sibs were of different HLA type. |Levine et al. (1980) studied serum androgen and 17-hydroxyprogesterone levels as well as HLA genotypes in 124 families of patients with classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency. In 8 kindreds, 16 pubertal or postpubertal persons of either sex were found to have biochemical evidence of 21-hydroxylase deficiency without clinical symptoms of excess virilism, amenorrhea, or infertility. They designated the disorder 'cryptic 21-hydroxylase deficiency.' Within each generation, the family members with the cryptic form were HLA identical. They suggested that these persons were compound heterozygotes for the classic gene and a cryptogenic gene. Of 42 pediatric patients with 21-hydroxylase deficiency (from 36 families) treated in Milwaukee between 1965 and 1981, 4 developed a malignant tumor: sarcoma or astrocytoma (Duck, 1981). |Kuttenn et al. (1985) found that 21-hydroxylase deficiency was the basis of hirsutism in 24 of 400 women (6%). The diagnosis was made by a high plasma level of 17-hydroxyprogesterone and its marked increase after ACTH stimulation. From genotyping of the 24 families, a high correlation with HLA-B14 and Aw33 was found. Nine HLA-identical sibs showed similar biologic profiles but had no hirsutism; skin sensitivity to androgens may be important in determining clinical expression of the disorder. (It was previously known that unusual sensitivity to androgens can lead to hirsutism despite normal plasma levels of androgen (Kuttenn et al., 1977).) The patients were not distinguishable from women with idiopathic hirsutism or polycystic ovarian disease (184700), either clinically or in plasma androgen levels. |Knochenhauer et al. (1997) hypothesized that heterozygosity for CYP21 mutations in women increases their risk of developing clinically evident hyperandrogenism, and that this risk is related to the severity of the mutation of CYP21 and/or the 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP) response to ACTH stimulation. To test these hypotheses, they studied 38 obligate carriers for 21-hydroxylase deficiency (i.e., mothers of children with CAH1 or nonclassic CAH), comparing them to 27 controls. Their data indicate that heterozygosity for CYP21 mutations does not appear to increase the risk of clinically evident hyperandrogenism, although carrying the defect was associated with higher mean and free T levels. Finally, due to the low frequency of androgen excess in their heterozygote population, they were unable to correlate the severity of CYP21 mutations and/or 17-OHP responses to ACTH stimulation with the presence of the phenotype. |Sinnott et al. (1989) presented analyses of families that showed profound discordance between the clinical features of sibs with 21-hydroxylase deficiency who appeared to be HLA identical, both in terms of serologically defined HLA polymorphism and in gene organization at the 21-hydroxylase and C4 loci (C4A, 120810; C4B, 120820). For example, in 1 family a boy had the simple virilizing form while his 2 younger sisters, who were both HLA-identical to their brother, had additional salt-wasting features. In 1 family they made the unusual observation of HLA-Bw47-bearing haplotypes that appeared to carry a functional 21-hydroxylase gene. |Jaresch et al. (1992) found a high frequency of asymptomatic adrenal tumors in association with homozygosity (82%) and heterozygosity (45%) for 21-hydroxylase deficiency. Jaresch et al. (1992) suggested that CAH should always be ruled out in the case of incidentally detected adrenal masses. Since CAH is a relatively frequent disorder and adrenal carcinoma belongs to the rarest malignant tumors, they concluded that malignant transformation of these tumors is unlikely. |Ravichandran et al. (1996) pointed out that both homozygous and heterozygous patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia have an increased cross-sectional area of their adrenal glands as well as an increased prevalence of adrenal incidentalomas, i.e., adrenal tumors discovered incidentally in the course of imaging studies performed for unrelated reasons (Jaresch et al., 1992). The prevalence of adrenal tumors may be more than 70% in nonclassic CAH and 'unmasked heterozygotes.' Ravichandran et al. (1996) presented 2 patients, female pseudohermaphrodites with the simple virilizing form of CAH and 21-hydroxylase deficiency, who functioned successfully as married phenotypic males. Both came to medical attention in their sixth decade by virtue of massive adrenal incidentalomas encountered in the evaluation of recurrent urinary tract infections. Each had a 46,XX karyotype, no palpable testes, and markedly elevated baseline levels of 17-hydroxyprogesterone. Both responded appropriately to dexamethasone suppression. Histologic and autopsy examination of the first patient's tumor and computed tomographic characteristics of the second patient revealed benign adenoma and mild lipoma, respectively. Ravichandran et al. (1996) concluded that these observations extended and confirmed previous recommendations that CAH be included in the differential diagnosis of adrenal incidentaloma and that baseline 17-hydroxyprogesterone levels be obtained, with ACTH stimulation if necessary, to diagnose the presence of nonclassic CAH. |Beuschlein et al. (1998) noted that 21-hydroxylase deficiency had been implicated in the pathogenesis of adrenocortical tumors. They investigated the mutation spectrum of the CYP21B gene and the mRNA expression of P450c21 in 6 aldosterone-producing adenomas, 7 cortisol-producing adenomas, 2 nonfunctional incidentally detected adenomas, and 4 adrenal carcinomas. The 10 exons, intron 2, intron 7, all other exon/intron junctions, and 380 bp of the promoter region of CYP21B were sequenced. In samples from 2 patients (1 with a cortisol-producing adenoma and 1 with an androgen-secreting adrenocortical carcinoma), they detected the heterozygous germline mutation val281 to leu in exon 7 (V281L; 613815.0002). A somatic, heterozygous microdeletion was found in exon 3 of 1 aldosterone-producing adenoma. The P450c21 gene expression correlated with the clinical phenotype of the tumor, with low P450c21 mRNA expression in nonfunctional adenomas (18.8%, 1.5%) compared with high P450c21 expression in aldosterone- and cortisol-producing adenomas (84 +/- 8% and 101 +/- 4%, respectively, vs normal adrenals, 100 +/- 10%). They concluded that the pathophysiologic significance of this finding in the presence of 1 normal CYP21B gene seems to be low, suggesting that 21-hydroxylase deficiency is not a major predisposing factor for adrenal tumor formation. |Meyer-Bahlburg (1999) noted that women with classic CAH have relatively low fertility rates. The author stated that the largest clinic population was studied by Mulaikal et al. (1987), who studied 80 women with classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency who were evenly split into the SV and SW forms. Half of the women were not heterosexually active. Those who were heterosexually active nevertheless appeared to have low fertility. Among the 25 SV women who reported both adequate vaginal reconstruction and heterosexual activity, the fertility rate was 60%. Among the 15 SW women with both adequate introitus and heterosexual activity, the fertility rate was only 7%; a single pregnancy was reported and that ended in an elective termination. Meyer-Bahlburg (1999) reviewed the various physical and behavioral factors that could account for the observed low rates of child bearing. |Merke et al. (2000) studied a group of patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia in whom plasma epinephrine and metanephrine concentrations and urinary epinephrine excretion were approximately 50% lower in those who had been hospitalized for adrenal crises than in those who had not. In 3 patients with congenital adrenal hyperplasia who had undergone bilateral adrenalectomy, the formation of the adrenal medulla was incomplete, and electron-microscopic studies revealed a depletion of secretory vesicles in chromaffin cells. Thus, the authors concluded that congenital adrenal hyperplasia compromises both the development and the functioning of the adrenomedullary system. |Green-Golan et al. (2007) compared 6 adolescents with classic CAH with 7 age-, sex-, and body mass index group-matched controls to assess hormonal, metabolic, and cardiovascular response to prolonged moderate-intensity exercise comparable to brisk walking. The CAH patients showed defective glycemic control and altered metabolic and hormonal responses. |Studies had shown that girls with CAH, a syndrome resulting in overproduction of adrenal androgens from early fetal life, are behaviorally masculinized. Nordenstrom et al. (2002) studied play with toys in a structured play situation and correlated the results with disease severity, assessed by CYP21 genotyping, and age at diagnosis. Girls with CAH played more with masculine toys than did controls when playing alone. In addition, the authors demonstrated a dose-response relationship between disease severity (i.e. degree of fetal androgen exposure) and degree of masculinization of behavior. They concluded that prenatal androgen exposure has a direct organizational effect on the human brain to determine certain aspects of sex-typed behavior. |Hormones of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and sex hormones interact with extrahypothalamic regulatory centers of the brain, including the amygdala and hippocampus. The amygdala is important in the processing of emotion and generation of fear, whereas the hippocampus plays an important role in memory. Chronic hypercortisolemia is associated with hippocampal damage, while glucocorticoids and corticotropin-releasing factor play a major role in the regulation of amygdala function. Merke et al. (2003) performed MRI of the brain on 27 children with classic CAH and 47 sex- and age-matched controls. Volumes of the cerebrum, ventricles, temporal lobe, amygdala, and hippocampus were quantified. Females with CAH did not have brains with male-specific characteristics. In contrast, a significant decrease in amygdala volume was observed in both males and females with CAH (males, P = 0.01; females, P = 0.002). Iatrogenic effects on the hippocampus due to glucocorticoid therapy were not observed in children with CAH. The authors concluded that prenatal glucocorticoid deficiency with resulting alterations in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis regulation, sex steroid excess, or some combination of these preferentially affect the growth and development of the amygdala, a structure with major functional implications that warrant further exploration. |Gidlof et al. (2007) found that female patients with severe CYP21 deficiency had longer gestational age than did patients with a milder form of the disease, indicating that androgen excess, increased 17-hydroxyprogesterone levels, or cortisol deficiency, or a combination of these factors, may be of importance for prolongation of pregnancy. The same correlation was not seen for male patients. The authors concluded that steroid hormones may affect the prolongation of pregnancy or onset of labor or both. |Moran et al. (2006) studied the frequency of CAH and nonclassic CAH (NCAH) infants born to mothers with 21-OH-deficient NCAH. The outcome of 203 pregnancies among 101 women with 21-OH-deficient NCAH was reviewed. The risk of a mother with 21-OH-deficient NCAH giving birth to a child affected with CAH was found to be 2.5%; at least 14.8% of children born to these mothers had NCAH. |
246450::HMG-CoA lyase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the HMGCL gene (613898) on chromosome 1p.|3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder with the cardinal manifestations of metabolic acidosis without ketonuria, hypoglycemia, and a characteristic pattern of elevated urinary organic acid metabolites, including 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric, 3-methylglutaric, and 3-hydroxyisovaleric acids. Urinary levels of 3-methylcrotonylglycine may be increased. Dicarboxylic aciduria, hepatomegaly, and hyperammonemia may also be observed. Presenting clinical signs include irritability, lethargy, coma, and vomiting (summary by Gibson et al., 1988). |Faull et al. (1976) reported a 7-month-old male infant from Australia with metabolic acidosis and hypoglycemia, who excreted organic acids suggestive of a defect in 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA lyase, the enzyme that catalyzes the final step of leucine degradation and plays a key role in ketone body formation. The profile of urinary organic acids was different from that of 3 previously identified defects of leucine degradation--maple syrup urine disease (248600), isovaleric acidemia (243500), and methylcrotonylglycinemia (210200). Wysocki and Hahnel (1976) demonstrated marked deficiency of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A lyase activity in leukocytes from the infant reported by Faull et al. (1976). Both parents had reduced levels of HMG-CoA lyase in leukocytes. The biochemical diagnosis is made by the finding of abnormal organic aciduria with greatly increased urinary excretion of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric acid and related substances. The enzyme can be measured in leukocytes and fibroblasts. Shilkin et al. (1981) provided further follow-up on this patient. At the age of 4 years and 7 months, he appeared to be well and developing satisfactorily. His diet had been difficult to control and the biochemical defect was exceedingly sensitive to small amounts of leucine in the diet. |Duran et al. (1979) observed a Moroccan family with 4 of 7 sibs affected. Prenatal diagnosis was possible by demonstration of HMG acid in the mother's urine. Recessive inheritance was supported by intermediate levels of lyase activity in both parents. |Leonard et al. (1979) reported a patient with HGM-CoA lyase deficiency presenting as Reye syndrome. |Robinson et al. (1980) described the case of a 2-year-old boy with acute fever, malaise, and somnolence with hepatomegaly, hyperammonemia, high SGOT, hypoglycemia and mild acidosis. Liver biopsy showed diffuse accumulation of lipid droplets in swollen hepatocytes. Abnormal urinary metabolites included beta-hydroxy-beta-methyl-glutarate (HMG). In liver and cultured skin fibroblasts, HMG-CoA lyase activity was about 10% of normal. The urine had an odor resembling that of a cat. The child's parents were unrelated and came from San Miguel in the Azores. Robinson et al. (1980) noted features resembling Reye syndrome. |Wilson et al. (1984) stated that acute pancreatitis is found at autopsy in over 7% of cases of Reye syndrome. They reported a 5-year-old child with a history of recurrent hypoglycemia who presented with a Reye-like syndrome and acute pancreatitis. HMG-CoA lyase deficiency was established by enzymatic analysis of skin fibroblasts and lymphocytes. This disorder is one of an increasing list of inborn errors of metabolism that clinically present as Reye syndrome or nonketotic hypoglycemia. |Berry et al. (1981) found deficiency of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutarate CoA lyase in liver and cultured fibroblasts of 2 related children ascertained because of abnormal metabolites in the urine: 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric acid, 3-methylglutaconic acid, 3-methylglutaric acid, and 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid. A shortage of glucose-sparing ketone bodies normally produced during fasting was thought to be responsible for the hypoglycemia that characterizes this metabolic defect. The absence of ketonuria in this disorder is a direct consequence of the metabolic lesion. HMG-CoA lyase is involved in ketogenesis, and the patient with the deficiency is compromised in the ability to generate ketone bodies.|Despite the clinical heterogeneity observed with HMG-CoA lyase deficiency, Sovik et al. (1984) could find no evidence of biochemical heterogeneity (residual enzyme activity in cultured fibroblasts was equally low in all 7 cases studied) or genetic heterogeneity (no complementation was observed in heterokaryons). |Roe et al. (1986) demonstrated 3-methylglutarylcarnitine in the urine of 4 patients with this disorder and suggested this as the cause of an apparently secondary carnitine deficiency. They suggested that dietary supplementation with carnitine may be warranted. |Wysocki and Hahnel (1986) reviewed 12 patients, and Gibson et al. (1988) reported 5 others. Gibson et al. (1988) reviewed 18 reported cases. |Ribes et al. (1990) described sudden death in a 13-month-old boy with HMG-CoA lyase deficiency.|Barash et al. (1990) determined HMG-CoA lyase activity by the spectrophotometric method of Wanders et al. (1988) in polymorphonuclear leukocytes and lymphocytes obtained from 33 persons in 4 generations of a highly consanguineous Arab-Bedouin family. Seven subjects were obligatory heterozygotes, being parents and grandparents of 3 propositi; in 7 additional subjects, enzyme activities in both cell types were in the heterozygous range. No asymptomatic homozygotes were found. |Grunert et al. (2017) reviewed the clinical presentation and outcome in a series of 37 patients with HMGCLD, including 30 from Turkey and the rest from Belgium, Germany, The Netherlands, and Switzerland. Most patients (94%) presented with an acute metabolic decompensation in the first year of life, approximately half in the neonatal period. The most common clinical symptoms were recurrent vomiting, seizures, and impaired vigilance. The most common laboratory findings were hypoglycemia, acidosis, an increased anion gap, hyperammonemia, and elevated transaminase activities. Of 32 patients, 10 had no further metabolic decompensations after diagnosis, and 22 had at least one more metabolic crisis, most often associated with infections, especially gastroenteritis or respiratory tract infections. Half of the patients had normal cognitive development, and the remainder had psychomotor deficits of variable severity. Six of the patients had died at a mean age of 11 years (range, 4 months to 40 years). |
605911::3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase-2 deficiency (HMGCS2D) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the HMGCS2 gene (600234) on chromosome 1p12.|Mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase deficiency is an inherited metabolic disorder caused by a defect in the enzyme that regulates the formation of ketone bodies. Patients present with hypoketotic hypoglycemia, encephalopathy, and hepatomegaly, usually precipitated by an intercurrent infection or prolonged fasting (summary by Aledo et al., 2006). |Thompson et al. (1997) described an 11-year-old boy, born of nonconsanguineous Chinese parents, with deficiency of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase. The boy first presented at 6 years of age after mild gastroenteritis with poor oral intake for 2 to 3 days that culminated in a brief generalized seizure that left him semicomatose. His blood glucose concentration was 9 mg per deciliter, and a urine dipstick test was negative for ketones. He had previously been well and tolerated minor illnesses without difficulty. He was asymptomatic except during prolonged fasting. Provocative tests were performed when he was 7 years of age. After fasting for 22 hours, the patient had a blood glucose concentration of 41 mg per deciliter and a plasma beta-hydroxybutyrate concentration of 0.2 mmol per liter. He rapidly became comatose and awake about 30 minutes after receiving a bolus intravenous injection of dextrose followed by a continuous infusion at a rate of 10 mg per kilogram per minute. The response was slower than that expected in children with brief episodes of hypoglycemia, in whom coma usually resolves within minutes. After the ingestion of long chain triglycerides, the patient's plasma free fatty acid concentrations increased appropriately, but plasma beta-hydroxybutyrate concentrations remained low. These concentrations also remained low after the ingestion of medium-chain triglycerides, indicating that enzyme function after the oxidation of long chain fatty acids, the first step in ketone body formation, was abnormal. Four hours after the ingestion of medium-chain triglycerides, the boy became comatose, with a blood glucose concentration of 50 mg per deciliter. Bouchard et al. (2001) followed up on this patient and another patient reported by Morris et al. (1998). They noted that both patients had normal development and no further decompensation following diagnosis. |Aledo et al. (2001) described a boy with HMG-CoA synthase-2 deficiency who presented at the age of 11 months with acute hypoglycemic coma and respiratory arrest after a 2-day history of gastroenteritis, vomiting, and poor food intake. In addition to low blood glucose, elevated transaminases and lactate dehydrogenase were found at admission. During a monitored fasting test, massive elevation of plasma free fatty acids without concomitant elevation of total plasma ketones was observed. The patient was placed on supplementary carnitine and the family was advised to avoid fasting for more than 8 hours and to administer a caloric drink at around midnight. Under this regimen, there were no subsequent hypoglycemic episodes, and the child at 4 years of age was developing normally with no residual neurologic impairment. |
231530::3-alpha-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is caused by compound heterozygous mutation in the HADH gene (601609) on chromosome 4q25.|Tein et al. (1991) reported a 16-year-old girl with 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency resulting in juvenile-onset recurrent myoglobinuria, hypoketotic hypoglycemic encephalopathy, and hypertrophic/dilated cardiomyopathy. Biochemical analysis showed that HADH enzyme activity was markedly decreased in skeletal muscle cells, whereas it was normal in fibroblasts. |Bennett et al. (1999) reported 3 unrelated patients with HADH deficiency resulting in sudden infant death. Clinically, there were variable features of hypotonia, hypoglycemia, hepatic steatosis, and hypoketotic dicarboxylic aciduria. Postmortem biochemical analysis showed residual liver HADH activity of 3.4%, 6.7%, and 11%; skeletal muscle activity was normal in all 3 patients. |Treacy et al. (2000) reported a case of HADH deficiency presenting as unexpected infant death. |O'Brien et al. (2000) reported a patient with HADH deficiency who presented at age 3 years with fulminant hepatic failure. Liver biopsy showed centrilobular necrosis and lipid accumulation. The patient received a living-related liver transplant and recovered.|
236795::Ko et al. (1991) described a 6-year-old Caucasian boy with a clinical picture typical of organic acidemia with repeated episodes of ketoacidosis. He showed marked failure to thrive and chronic lactic acidemia. Urinary excretion of 3-hydroxyisobutyric acid ranged from 170 to 390 mmol/mol of creatinine. Administration of valine increased the excretion strikingly and reproduced the clinical picture of ketoacidosis. Concentrations of free carnitine were low and esterified carnitine was elevated. Treatment with carnitine and a diet restricted in protein appeared to be beneficial. This is a disorder of valine metabolism; see also methacrylic aciduria (250620). Ko et al. (1991) speculated that the fundamental defect was in 3-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase, which catalyzes the conversion of 3-hydroxyisobutyrate to methylmalonic semialdehyde, or in the conversion of the semialdehyde to propionyl CoA. They favored the latter possibility. Chitayat et al. (1992) reported the association of 3-hydroxyisobutyric aciduria with brain dysgenesis. They described monozygotic male twins, born to nonconsanguineous parents, who had dysmorphic facial features, microcephaly, migrational brain disorder, and congenital intracerebral calcification. In addition to excreting excessive amounts of 3-hydroxyisobutyric acid, they had evidence of impaired oxidative metabolism and metabolic acidosis. The level of 3-hydroxyisobutyrate in stored samples of midtrimester amniotic fluid was found to be high. Thus, this disorder is potentially amenable to prenatal diagnosis. |Sasaki et al. (1998) described 2 Japanese brothers with 3-hydroxyisobutyric aciduria. The elder brother died in a ketoacidotic episode at the age of 4 years; the younger brother also manifested repeated episodes of ketoacidosis after 1 year of age. The diagnosis of 3-hydroxyisobutyric aciduria was made by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis, using the unique fragment ions of 3-hydroxyisobutyric acid. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed focal white matter abnormalities. Protein restriction was effective in preventing ketoacidotic episodes, although carnitine therapy was seen as less effective. |
250620::3-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA hydrolase deficiency (HIBCHD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the HIBCH gene (610690) on chromosome 2q32.|3-Hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA hydrolase deficiency is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism characterized by severely delayed psychomotor development, neurodegeneration, increased lactic acid, and brain lesions in the basal ganglia (summary by Ferdinandusse et al., 2013).|Brown et al. (1982) found deficiency of beta-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA deacylase, an enzyme unique to valine metabolism, in a male infant who was born to first-cousin parents and died at age 3 months with multiple physical malformations (dysmorphic facies, multiple vertebral anomalies, tetralogy of Fallot, and, at autopsy, agenesis of the cingulate gyrus and corpus callosum). A metabolic abnormality was suspected because of urinary excretion of cysteine and cysteamine conjugates of methacrylic acid. The CoA ester of this compound is an intermediate in the pathway of valine oxidation. Subsequent investigation revealed a deficiency of beta-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA deacylase, an enzyme unique to valine metabolism. The enzyme defect results in accumulation of methacrylyl-CoA, a highly reactive compound, which readily undergoes addition reactions with free sulfhydryl groups. Brown et al. (1982) suggested that tissue damage due to reactions between methacrylyl-CoA and important sulfhydryl-containing enzymes and cofactors may be responsible for the teratogenic effects. This was viewed as an example of an inborn error of metabolism with effects due to intracellular accumulation of a small amount of a highly toxic intermediate metabolite rather than the accumulation in the body fluids of high levels of metabolites of relatively low toxicity. Recessive inheritance seemed quite certain because both parents had intermediate levels of enzyme activity. See also 3-hydroxyisobutyric aciduria (236795). |Loupatty et al. (2007) described a second patient with HIBCH deficiency, who was the first child of healthy, nonconsanguineous white parents and was born at term following an uneventful pregnancy. He appeared well until 4 months of age when his parents noted head bobbing. This was followed by a delay in motor milestones and then by ataxia and a loss of skills. He was able to roll over at age 5 months but lost this ability at age 10 months. From age 9 months, he started to have transient absences and episodes of eye rolling. Examination at age 11 months revealed an alert, interactive child who had no nystagmus but constant titubation of the head. He had marked truncal ataxia and was unable to sit unsupported. At age 14 months, following 2 days of coryza and lethargy, he became acutely unwell, with a reduced level of consciousness and metabolic acidosis, and required intubation and ventilatory support. As he recovered from this episode of acute encephalopathy he developed dystonia, predominantly affecting the right arm and leg. Both the patient of Brown et al. (1982) and the patient of Loupatty et al. (2007) demonstrated delayed development of motor skills, hypotonia, initial poor feeding, and a deterioration of neurologic function during the first stages of life. However, whereas the first patient showed agenesis of the cingulate gyrus and the corpus callosum, no structural brain abnormalities were found in the second patient. Moreover, the brain anomalies in the second patient, as indicated by CT and MRI scans, were predominantly in the basal ganglia and consistent with Leigh syndrome. The second patient manifested no dysmorphic facial features and no congenital heart disease and was still living at the time of report. |Ferdinandusse et al. (2013) reported 2 brothers, born of distantly related Pakistani parents, with a severe neurodegenerative disorder resulting in death in the first years of life. The patients presented in early infancy with delayed psychomotor development or developmental regression, hypotonia, recurrent vomiting, and seizures. Brain imaging showed abnormal signals in the globi pallidi reminiscent of Leigh syndrome. Laboratory studies showed increased lactate; 1 patient had increased hydroxy-C4-carnitine. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed decreased activity of mitochondrial respiratory enzyme complexes II, II+III, and IV as well as decreased activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) in 1 patient; these values were normal in the other patient. |Reuter et al. (2014) reported a 5-year-old boy, born of consanguineous Tunisian parents, with HIBCHD. He showed normal development until about 7 months of age, after which he showed hypotonia, psychomotor delay, and strabismus. Serial brain imaging showed a progressive reduction in brain volume, enlarged ventricles, and increasing signal abnormalities of the basal ganglia, reminiscent of Leigh syndrome. He never learned to sit independently and never acquired language. He developed refractory epilepsy at age 3 years and possible optic atrophy with blindness at age 4. Additional features included increased limb muscle tone with hyperreflexia, a central coordination disorder, cryptorchidism, and nystagmus. The results of laboratory investigations and muscle biopsy were inconsistent at first, but eventually showed increased blood lactate, increased blood hydroxy-C4-carnitine, and depletion of mtDNA and decreases in multiple mitochondrial respiratory enzyme activities in skeletal muscle. The findings were consistent with a defect in mitochondrial energy metabolism. |Stiles et al. (2015) reported 2 sibs, born of first-cousin Lebanese parents, with HIBCH deficiency. These were the 2 oldest HIBCHD patients described to that time. Patient 1, a girl, the product of in vitro fertilization (IVF), was born at 38 weeks' gestation by cesarean section after an uneventful pregnancy. Her brother, patient 2, was the second child of a triplet pregnancy conceived by IVF. The presentation of both patients was consistent with that of previously described patients. Loss of milestones was followed by neurodegeneration within the first year of life. Both patients showed dystonia, spastic quadriplegia, and absent reflexes in the lower extremities before the age of 1 year. Early brain MRI abnormalities included bilateral, symmetrical T2 hyperintensity in the basal ganglia, specifically the globus pallidus, with corresponding restricted diffusion in the acute/subacute phase. The patients also showed asymmetric cerebral peduncle involvement and transient T2 hyperintensity in the caudate nuclei, which had previously been reported in patients with HIBCH deficiency. The disorder evolved into a slowly progressive encephalopathy. In the second decade of life, truncal hypotonia remained along with more pronounced hypertonia in extremities, with intermittent dystonia in the trunk, extremities and face. Both patients were still able to interact and partially communicate with sounds and facial expression. No other organ system complications were apparent. The initial edema, bilateral T2 in the MRI, transiently improved after a 2- to 4-year interval. However, in later stages of disease, cystic encephalomalacia and atrophy developed in the basal ganglia. Extensive metabolic evaluation was normal. A muscle biopsy from patient 1 showed normal histology, including cytochrome c oxidase (COX) stain, and normal respiratory chain activity. Stiles et al. (2015) demonstrated elevated hydroxy-C4-carnitine in newborn screening cards for these 2 sibs. Stiles et al. (2015) stated that to their knowledge, progression of MRI findings in HIBCH deficiency over a period of several years had not previously been illustrated. |Peters et al. (2015) reported a female patient with HIBCHD who presented at the age of 5 months with hypotonia, developmental delay, and cerebral atrophy on MRI. Urine tandem mass spectrometry screening showed large increases in the cysteine conjugate of methacrylate previously described in HIBCHD. 3-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA hydrolase activity in fibroblasts was below the limit of detection of the enzyme assay. Urine metabolite investigations showed increases in 3-hydroxyisobutyryl-carnitine, 2,3-dihydroxy-2-methylbutyrate, and several metabolites indicating accumulation and subsequent metabolism of methacrylyl-CoA and acryloyl-CoA. The metabolites derived from acryloyl-CoA were also increased in patients with inborn errors of propionyl-CoA metabolism, indicating the involvement of a secondary propionyl-CoA pathway utilizing 3-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA hydrolase. Peters et al. (2015) reported that with the exception of 3-hydroxyisobutyryl carnitine, the metabolite abnormalities were essentially the same as those observed in patients with ECHS1 deficiency (ECHS1D; 616277). |
210200::3-methylcrotonylglycinuria I (MCC1D) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding the alpha subunit of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCCC1; 609010) on chromosome 3q27.|Also see 3-methylcrotonylglycinuria II (MCC2D; 210210), caused by mutation in the beta subunit of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCCC2; 609014).|Eldjarn et al. (1970) reported a patient with excess urinary excretion of beta-methylcrotonylglycine (MCG). The main clinical features included muscular hypotonia and atrophy, suggestive of a neurologic defect. The disorder was gradually progressive despite a diet low in leucine, which reduced excretion of the abnormal metabolites. Both parents and 2 sibs excreted one of the abnormal metabolites and were considered to be heterozygous. In a follow-up report of the patient reported by Eldjarn et al. (1970), Stokke et al. (1972) noted that biotin was of no therapeutic value. Stokke et al. (1972) identified a deficiency of beta-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase. |Tanaka and Isselbacher (1970) observed beta-hydroxyisovaleric aciduria induced by biotin deficiency in an experimental animal model. They concluded that the results, similar to those seen in human MCC deficiency, were caused by a metabolic block of beta-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase, which is dependent on biotin. |Finnie et al. (1976) reported a 3-month-old child who presented with a history of feeding problems and failure to thrive, and later developed seizures and profound irreversible metabolic acidosis. There was gross excretion of 2-oxoglutaric and 3-hydroxyisovaleric (HIVA) acid. Postmortem liver enzyme studies showed a deficiency of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase. |Roth et al. (1976) reported a patient with high urinary excretion of beta-methylcrotonic acid and hydroxyphenyllactic acid, but low excretion of hydroxyisovaleric acid, and suggested that the disorder was acquired secondary to congenital heart disease. |Bartlett et al. (1984) reported a 22-month-old girl who presented in a hypotonic, unconscious state with involuntary movements of the upper limbs. She had hypoglycemia, mild metabolic acidosis, and gross neutrophilia. 3-Methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase activity was undetectable in fibroblasts regardless of biotin concentration in the medium. The patient recovered and remained well on a protein-restricted diet, but continued to excrete excess MCG and HIVA. |Layward et al. (1989) reported a patient who presented at age 14 months with an episode of apnea, involuntary movements, and back-arching after 4 days of diarrhea. He had severe hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, mild metabolic acidosis, and ketonuria. A liver biopsy showed diffuse macro- and microvesicular fatty infiltration consistent with Reye syndrome. Urine organic acid analysis showed increased 3-hydroxyisovalerate and 3-methylcrotonylglycine. Cultured fibroblasts from the patient showed less than 1% normal activity and was unresponsive to biotin. |A patient reported by Rolland et al. (1991) was born of consanguineous parents and presented at age 14 months in a subcoma with hypoglycemia and ketoacidosis; at age 16 months, she had a second episode with drowsiness, diarrhea, hypoglycemia, and hypotonia. Urinary organic acid analysis showed HIVA and MCG, and cultured fibroblasts had less than 1% normal MCC activity. She recovered from the acute episodes and was treated successfully with a protein-restricted diet and carnitine supplementation, although excess urinary excretion of HIVA and MCG persisted. |Elpeleg et al. (1992) found hypotonia as the initial symptom in 4 sibs, aged 2.5 to 9 years, with isolated 3-MCC deficiency in a nonconsanguineous Tunisian-Jewish family. Plasma carnitine was markedly deficient and urinary organic acid analysis demonstrated increased excretion of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid and 3-methylcrotonylglycine. 3-MCC enzyme activity was reduced in skin fibroblasts. Pearson et al. (1995) reported biotin-resistant isolated MCC deficiency in a 2-year-old boy who first presented with lethargy after mild head trauma, and later with Shigella gastroenteritis. The authors emphasized the benign nature of the disorder in this patient, which was only diagnosed during episodes of metabolic decompensation. The child had normal growth and development. |Murayama et al. (1997) reported a 15-year-old Japanese girl with a former clinical diagnosis of cerebral palsy who was found to have isolated 3-MCC deficiency. She had growth retardation from birth, profound mental retardation, tonic seizures, quadriplegia with opisthotonic dystonia, and gastroesophageal reflux. Brain MRI showed marked brain atrophy. Murayama et al. (1997) noted that she was the oldest reported patient. |Steen et al. (1999) reported a mildly retarded infant with failure to thrive who developed hypoglycemia, focal seizures, respiratory failure, and hemiparesis during a febrile episode at the age of 16 months. A brain scan was initially normal and showed hemilateral focal edema and gliosis at later stages. 3-MCC deficiency was suggested by elevated urinary excretion of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid and 3-methylcrotonylglycine, and confirmed by enzyme assays. The patient was treated with protein restriction and carnitine and remained stable during the following 5 years, but hemiparesis and some developmental delay persisted. Steen et al. (1999) suggested that 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency be added to the list of possible causes of metabolic stroke. |De Kremer et al. (2002) reported a patient from Argentina with isolated biotin-resistant MCC deficiency diagnosed at 14 months of age. Clinical features included severe psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, areflexia, and failure to thrive. The patient died at age 3 years. Brain MRI at 14 months showed multiple foci of leukodystrophy, and there were also high levels of oxypurines in the cerebrospinal fluid, which the authors suggested resulted from energetic consequences of enzyme deficiency in the brain. The findings extended the phenotype of MCC deficiency. |Shepard et al. (2015) performed whole-exome sequencing on DNA from 33 cases of MCC deficiency and 108 healthy controls and examined these data for associations between MCC mutational status, genetic ancestry, or consanguinity and the absence or presence/specificity of clinical symptoms in MCC deficiency cases. Shepard et al. (2015) determined that individuals with nonspecific clinical phenotypes are highly inbred compared with cases of MCC deficiency that are asymptomatic and with healthy controls. For 5 of these 10 individuals, Shepard et al. (2015) discovered a homozygous damaging mutation in a disease gene that is likely to underlie their nonspecific clinical phenotypes previously attributed to MCC deficiency. The authors concluded that nonspecific phenotypes attributed to MCC deficiency are associated with consanguinity and are likely not due to mutations in the MCC enzyme, but result from rare homozygous mutations in other disease genes. |
250950::3-methylglutaconic aciduria type I (MCGA1) can be caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the AUH gene (600529), which encodes 3-methylglutaconyl-CoA hydratase, on chromosome 9q22.|Type I MGCA is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of leucine catabolism. The metabolic landmark is urinary excretion of 3-methylglutaconic acid (3-MGA) and its derivatives 3-methylglutaric acid (3-MG) and 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid (3-HIVA). Two main presentations have been described: 1 with onset in childhood associated with the nonspecific finding of psychomotor retardation, and the other with onset in adulthood of a progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by ataxia, spasticity, and sometimes dementia; these patients develop white matter lesions in the brain. However, some asymptomatic pediatric patients have been identified by newborn screening and show no developmental abnormalities when reexamined later in childhood (summary by Wortmann et al., 2010). |Genetic Heterogeneity and Classification of Methylglutaconic Aciduria|Methylglutaconic aciduria is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder. Type II MGCA (MGCA2), also known as Barth syndrome (BTHS; 302060), is caused by mutation in the tafazzin gene (TAZ; 300394) on chromosome Xq28. It is characterized by mitochondrial cardiomyopathy, short stature, skeletal myopathy, and recurrent infections; cognitive development is normal. Type III MGCA (MGCA3; 258501), caused by mutation in the OPA3 gene (606580) on chromosome 19q13, involves optic atrophy, movement disorder, and spastic paraplegia. In types II and III, the elevations of 3-methylglutaconate and 3-methylglutarate in urine are modest. Type IV MGCA (MGCA4; 250951) represents an unclassified group of patients who have severe psychomotor retardation and cerebellar dysgenesis. Type V MGCA (MGCA5; 610198), caused by mutation in the DNAJC19 gene (608977) on chromosome 3q26, is characterized by early-onset dilated cardiomyopathy with conduction defects, nonprogressive cerebellar ataxia, testicular dysgenesis, and growth failure in addition to 3-methylglutaconic aciduria (Chitayat et al., 1992; Davey et al., 2006). Type VI MGCA (MGCA6; 614739), caused by mutation in the SERAC1 gene (614725) on chromosome 6q25, includes deafness, encephalopathy, and a Leigh-like syndrome. Type VII MGCA (MGCA7; 616271), caused by mutation in the CLPB gene (616254) on chromosome 11q13, includes cataracts, neurologic involvement, and neutropenia. Type VIII MCGA (MGCA8; 617248) is caused by mutation in the HTRA2 gene (606441) on chromosome 2p13. Type IX MCGA (MGCA9; 617698) is caused by mutation in the TIMM50 gene (607381) on chromosome 19q13. |Eriguchi et al. (2006) noted that type I MGCA is very rare, with only 13 patients reported in the literature as of 2003. |Wortmann et al. (2013) proposed a pathomechanism-based classification for 'inborn errors of metabolism with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria as discriminative feature.|Greter et al. (1978) described brother and sister with choreoathetosis, spastic paraparesis, dementia, optic atrophy, and, in the urine, increased amounts of 3-methylglutaric and 3-methylglutaconic acids. The excretion was increased by leucine loading. 3-Methylglutaconic acid is known to be an intermediate in the catabolism of leucine. 3-Methylglutaconyl-CoA hydratase was postulated to be the deficient enzyme. |Robinson et al. (1976) gave a brief report of a case of 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. The clinical picture was somewhat different and the amounts of the 2 organic acids in the urine were about 5 times greater. The hydratase mentioned above was about 30% of normal in skeletal muscle. The authors were not convinced that the primary enzyme defect was in 3-methylglutaconyl-CoA hydratase.|In fibroblasts from 2 brothers with 3-methylglutaconic aciduria reported by Duran et al. (1982), Narisawa et al. (1986) demonstrated deficiency (2 to 3% of normal) of 3-methylglutaconyl-CoA hydratase (EC 4.2.1.18). The phenotype in these brothers was different from that in the cases reported by Greter et al. (1978) and others, with a progressive degenerative neurologic disorder and lesser amounts of 3-methylglutaconic acid in the urine. In patients of the latter type, Narisawa et al. (1986) found normal activity of 3-MG-CoA-hydratase. In the sibs with deficiency, the clinical picture was similar. Both had retardation of speech development and in 1 this was the only abnormality. Motor development was also delayed in the older brother, who walked first at 2 years of age and had a short attention span. He had had an unexplained episode of unconsciousness lasting nearly a day. He responded to an 18-hour fast with symptomatic hypoglycemia and metabolic acidosis. Fasting did not produce hypoglycemia in the younger brother. Fibroblasts of the parents, who were not known to be related, were not available for study. Fibroblasts from patients with the neurologic degenerative form of 3-methylglutaconic aciduria had normal levels of the enzyme 3-MG-CoA-hydratase. Defects in all 8 enzymes involved in leucine degradation have been reported; see Figure 1 of Narisawa et al. (1986). |Gibson et al. (1991) emphasized phenotypic heterogeneity of this metabolic disorder. |Zeharia et al. (1992) described a seemingly 'new' variant in 2 sibs with normal enzyme activity who had choreoathetoid movements, optic atrophy, and mild developmental delay. The boy demonstrated developmental improvement in his second year of life and his sister developed well, with normal school performance. |Kuhara et al. (1992) reported 3-methylglutaconic aciduria discovered during pregnancy in 2 women who were generally healthy. |Gibson et al. (1998) described 3 patients with this disorder, bringing the total number of patients identified with 3-MG-CoA hydratase deficiency to 8 (7 families). The phenotypic presentation has varied from mild, including delayed development of language and hyperchloremic acidosis associated with gastroesophageal reflux, to a much more severe phenotype, including seizures, cerebellar findings, and atrophy of the basal ganglia. |Shoji et al. (1999) reported a 9-month-old Japanese boy with type I MGCA, who was born of consanguineous parents. He showed progressive neurologic impairment with quadriplegia, athetoid movements, and severe psychomotor retardation from age 4 months. |Wiley et al. (1999) reported a boy, born of first-cousin parents of Lebanese extraction, who was found on newborn screening to have 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type I. In this patient and younger asymptomatic sib, Nga Ly et al. (2003) identified a homozygous mutation in the AUH gene (600529.0003). At 2.5 years of age, the boy was healthy, with entirely normal growth and development. Wortmann et al. (2010) provided follow-up of the Lebanese sibs reported by Nga Ly et al. (2003). At ages 9 and 6.5 years, both had normal development and unremarkable physical examinations. Brain imaging was not performed. |Illsinger et al. (2004) reported a German boy with type I MGCA who had normal psychomotor development, but repeated febrile seizures. He carried a homozygous mutation (600529.0005) in the AUH gene. Wortmann et al. (2010) reported follow-up of the German patient reported by Illsinger et al. (2004). At age 10 years, he showed normal development and attended regular school but had attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Brain MRI showed mild signal abnormalities in the deep frontal white matter with sparing of the U-fibers. The authors suggested that these changes may represent the earliest stages of a slowly progressive neurodegenerative disorder. |Eriguchi et al. (2006) reported a 55-year-old woman who presented with progressive forgetfulness, unsteady gait, hyperreflexia, cerebellar ataxia, dysarthria, and urinary incontinence. Brain MRI showed leukoencephalopathy with hyperintensities in the cerebral white matter extending into the subcortical U-fibers and in the middle cerebellar peduncles. Urine amino acid analysis showed a pattern consistent with type I MGCA. She was born of first-cousin parents and had normal development. Genetic analysis identified a homozygous mutation (600529.0002) in the AUH gene. |Wortmann et al. (2010) reported 2 unrelated patients with genetically confirmed type I MGCA who first developed symptoms as adults. A Dutch woman presented with progressive visual loss with optic atrophy at age 35, and developed dysarthria, limb ataxia, and gait ataxia over the following 16 years. A British man presented with mild cerebellar ataxia at age 30, which progressed to spastic paraparesis, nystagmus, and dementia over the next 29 years. Brain MRI at ages 61 and 50 years, respectively, showed extensive confluent white matter abnormalities in both patients. Lesions were restricted to the supratentorial region with involvement of the deep and subcortical white matter, but sparing of the cerebellum and corpus callosum. Genetic analysis identified compound heterozygous (600529.0006 and 600529.0007) and homozygous (600529.0008) mutations in the AUH gene, respectively. Wortmann et al. (2010) noted that patients with adult-onset show a distinct clinical pattern of progressive ataxia and spasticity associated with brain white matter lesions. |
302060::Barth syndrome, also known as 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type II (MGCA2), is caused by mutation in the tafazzin gene (TAZ; 300394) on chromosome Xq28.|Barth syndrome (BTHS) is an X-linked disease conventionally characterized by dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD) with endocardial fibroelastosis (EFE), a predominantly proximal skeletal myopathy, growth retardation, neutropenia, and organic aciduria, particularly excess of 3-methylglutaconic acid. Features of the disease that are less well known include hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, isolated left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC), ventricular arrhythmia, motor delay, poor appetite, fatigue and exercise intolerance, hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, hyperammonemia, and dramatic late catch-up growth after growth delay throughout childhood (summary by Steward et al., 2010). |For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, see MGCA type I (250950).|Barth et al. (1981, 1983) described a large Dutch pedigree showing X-linked inheritance of a disorder characterized by dilated cardiomyopathy, neutropenia, skeletal myopathy, and abnormal mitochondria. By electron microscopy, the mitochondria showed concentric, tightly packed cristae and occasional inclusion bodies. |Hodgson et al. (1987) thought that the same disorder was present in the family they reported in which many males in at least 3 generations and 7 sibships connected through females died between ages 3 days and 31 months of sepsis due to agranulocytosis or of cardiac failure. Weakness of skeletal muscles with sparing of the extraocular and bulbar muscles was noted. Granulocytopenia was found as early as cord blood samples. Differentiation in the bone marrow was arrested at the myelocyte stage. None of the boys had a gross structural cardiac abnormality. Endocardial fibroelastosis was documented in 2, and in 1 of these, electron microscopy demonstrated abnormality of mitochondria.|Hodgson et al. (1987) also suggested that the family reported by Neustein et al. (1979) had the same disorder. Neustein et al. (1979) demonstrated abnormal mitochondria on electron microscopic examination of a transvascular endomyocardial biopsy from an infant with cardiomyopathy and chronic congestive heart failure. At autopsy, similar abnormal mitochondria were seen in skeletal muscle, liver, and kidneys. In 3 other males in 2 sibships related as first cousins or first cousins once removed, autopsy showed endocardial fibroelastosis and, by electron microscopy, abnormal mitochondria. A heterozygote showed no abnormality on skeletal muscle biopsy. No mention of neutropenia in the affected males was made. |Ino et al. (1988) reported cases of dilated cardiomyopathy, short stature, and abnormal carnitine metabolism. |Fixler et al. (1970) described 4 males in 3 sibships, related through females, with the contracted form of endocardial fibroelastosis, which is frequently associated with malformations of the heart. The affected males died of heart failure in the first years of life. Lindenbaum et al. (1973) described a British kindred in which there were 2 males over 2 generations with endocardial fibroelastosis. The propositus and a male first cousin of his mother died in infancy of 'heart trouble.' Autopsies on both confirmed the primary dilated type of endocardial fibroelastosis. One had no other birth defects; the other had a hypoplastic left kidney. Several other males of this kindred died before the age of 2 years. This pattern of inheritance, along with the findings of Fixler et al. (1970), suggested X-linked transmission. Westwood et al. (1975) described a family with a pedigree consistent with X-linked recessive inheritance in 3 males in successive generations. |Kelley et al. (1989, 1991) elaborated on the clinical picture of this disorder on the basis of 7 affected boys form 5 unrelated families with dilated cardiomyopathy, growth retardation, neutropenia, and persistently elevated urinary levels of 3-methylglutaconate, 3-methylglutarate, and 2-ethylhydracrylate. The clinical course of the disorder was characterized by severe or lethal cardiac disease and recurrent infections during infancy and early childhood but relative improvement in later childhood. The initial presentation of the syndrome varied from congenital dilated cardiomyopathy to infantile congestive heart failure to isolated neutropenia without clinical evidence of heart disease. The excretion of 3-methylglutaconate and 3-methylglutarate appeared to be independent of the metabolism of leucine, the presumed precursor of these organic acids. Chitayat et al. (1992) referred to this form of 3-methylglutaconic aciduria as type II. |Orstavik et al. (1993) reported 3 families with possible X-linked congestive cardiomyopathy associated with specific abnormalities of the mitochondria. The heart disorder presented as endocardial fibroelastosis with neonatal death in 2 brothers in 1 family and as heart failure and death in infancy in 2 brothers in the other 2 families. In 1 family, a maternal uncle may also have been affected. Pyoderma and neutropenia were reported in 1 of the boys. Electron microscopy of heart muscle showed increased numbers of mitochondria and abnormal mitochondrial crystal condensations and paracrystalline inclusions in all sibships. |Ades et al. (1993) studied a large Australian family with no known Dutch forebears in which affected males over 3 generations had dilated cardiomyopathy, short stature, and neutropenia. Age at diagnosis ranged from 6 weeks to 10 years, with a maximum recorded survival age of 10 years and 3 months. Clinical details were available for 6 boys, 4 deceased and 2 living. Cardiomyopathy and progressive growth failure with decline of both length and weight velocities over time were the most consistent clinical markers of disease. Some patients displayed endocardial fibroelastosis. Neutropenia was congenital and persistent in 1 boy, recurrent in 2, and documented once in another. Skeletal myopathy was present in 3 boys and was heralded by delay in gross motor development or an abnormal gait. One boy had clinical peripheral neuropathy and complex neuroophthalmologic signs, suggesting involvement of the lower midbrain and possibly the cerebellum. Ades et al. (1993) noted that ophthalmoplegia is a recognized finding in mitochondrial myopathies, but had not previously been reported in patients with Barth syndrome. Additional findings included talipes equinovarus in 2 boys, 1 of whom also had minor facial anomalies and congenital pectus excavatum.|Christodoulou et al. (1994) described 6 cases of Barth syndrome from 4 families, including 5 patients who were still alive at ages 11 months, 2 years, 5.9 years, 6.5 years, and 13 years. The authors noted that neuromuscular and cardiovascular symptoms and severity of infections tended to improve with age, whereas short stature persisted. In addition, they observed myopathic facies and a nasal quality to speech in their cases. Urinary organic acid abnormalities and plasma carnitine deficiency were inconsistent findings. |Gedeon et al. (1995) reported a large Australian family in which male infants died from congenital dilated cardiomyopathy. There was a strong family history of unexplained death in infant males over at least 4 generations in a pattern consistent with X-linked recessive inheritance. Death always occurred in early infancy, without development of the characteristic features associated with Barth syndrome, such as skeletal myopathy, short stature, and neutropenia. Two of the patients also had talipes equinovarus. Affected members of this family were originally thought to have a form of dilated cardiomyopathy, which was designated CMD3A. |Bleyl et al. (1997) described the clinical and pathologic findings of a 4-generation Utah family in which 6 males were affected with severe X-linked cardiomyopathy. Consistent findings included neonatal onset of ventricular dysfunction frequently complicated by arrhythmias and cardiac failure during the first year. Growth retardation was seen in 4 of the patients, neutropenia was seen in 2, and 1 patient had muscle weakness. Electrocardiographic findings were diagnostic of isolated noncompaction of the left ventricular myocardium (LVNC) (Chin et al., 1990). Fetal echocardiograms obtained between 24 to 30 weeks' gestation in 3 of the affected males showed a dilated left ventricle in 1, but were not otherwise diagnostic of LVNC in any of the patients. Four of the affected individuals died during infancy, 1 was in cardiac failure at age 8 months, and 1 was alive following cardiac transplant at age 9 months. The hearts from the infants who died or underwent transplantation showed dilation and hypertrophy, with coarse, deep ventricular trabeculations within the left ventricle, and prominent endocardial fibroelastosis, characteristic of LVNC. Histologically, the myocardium showed loosely arranged fascicles of myocytes, especially in the subepicardial regions and more prominent in the left ventricle. Markedly elongated mitochondria were present in some ventricular myocytes. With cardiac transplantation, a patient had survived to the age of 7 years at the time of report; with aggressive medical management, another patient was alive at age 14 months. |Marziliano et al. (2007) reported a 12-year-old boy with Barth syndrome. The boy had left ventricular noncompaction and dilated cardiomyopathy, which was detected at 3 months, skeletal myopathy, recurrent oral aphthous ulcers, and cyclic neutropenia. Left ventricular function progressively improved from age 5 years and became subclinical and normal; he presented at age 11 with recurrent ulcers and signs of myopathy, including muscle weakness and atrophy. Molecular analysis identified a mutation in the TAZ gene (300394.0012) inherited from his unaffected mother. He was also heterozygous for a mutation in the LDB3 gene (605906), which is associated with left ventricular noncompaction. The patient's father and brother also carried the LDB3 mutation and had evidence of left ventricular trabeculation on imaging without dysfunction. The significance of the LDB3 mutation was unclear. |Hastings et al. (2009) studied 12 patients from 10 families with mutation-proven Barth syndrome (see, e.g., 300394.0006) and observed similarity in the facial features of the boys. The characteristic facies was most evident in infancy and included a tall and broad forehead, round face with prominent chin and full cheeks, large ears, and deep-set eyes. The features became less evident during puberty and into adulthood, with loss of the prominence of the cheeks. The most striking feature was the development of gynoid stature and fat distribution during the late pubertal period of 'catch-up' growth. |Steward et al. (2010) reported that 6 of 19 UK families with genetically and biochemically proven Barth syndrome (see, e.g., 300394.0006) had male fetal loss and stillbirths in addition to severe neonatal illness or death. In these families, there were multiple miscarriages of male fetuses, 9 males were stillborn, and 14 males died as neonates or infants, but there were no miscarriages, stillbirths, or childhood deaths of females. BTHS was definitively proven in 5 males with fetal onset of CMD with or without hydrops, endocardial fibroelastosis, and/or left ventricular noncompaction. Steward et al. (2010) suggested that Barth syndrome is an underrecognized cause of male fetal demise. |Thompson et al. (2016) conducted a multidisciplinary investigation involving 42 patients with BTHS, including echocardiograms, muscle strength testing, functional exercise capacity testing, physical activity assessments, cardiolipin analysis, 3-methylglutaconic acid analysis, and review of genotype data. Echocardiography revealed considerable variability in cardiac features. By contrast, almost all patients had significantly reduced functional exercise capacity. Multivariate analysis revealed significant relationships between cardiolipin ratio and left ventricular mass and between cardiolipin ratio and functional exercise capacity. |Female carriers of the BTHS gene appear to be healthy. This could be due to a selection against cells that have the mutant allele on the active X chromosome. Orstavik et al. (1998) therefore analyzed X-chromosome inactivation in 16 obligate carriers of BTHS from 6 families, using PCR of a polymorphic CAG repeat in the first exon of the androgen receptor gene (AR; 313700). An extremely skewed X-inactivation pattern (equal to or more than 95:5), not found in 148 female controls, was demonstrated in 6 carriers. The skewed pattern in 2 carriers from 1 family was confirmed in DNA from cultured fibroblasts. Five carriers from 2 families had a skewed pattern, between 80:20 and less than 95:5, a pattern that was found in only 11 of 148 female controls. Of the 11 carriers with a skewed pattern, the parental origin of the inactive X chromosome was maternal in all 7 cases for which this could be determined. In 2 families, carriers with an extremely skewed pattern and carriers with a random pattern were found. The skewed X inactivation in 11 of 16 carriers is probably the result of a selection against cells with the mutated gene on the active X chromosome. Since BTHS also shows great clinical variation within families, additional factors are likely to influence the expression of the phenotype. Such factors may also influence the selection mechanism in carriers. |Barth (2005) stated that no obligate or genetically proven female carriers had been reported with symptoms of the disease, and the survival of carriers did not differ from the general population.|Barth et al. (2004) updated information on Barth syndrome. Following the prediction that the TAZ gene encodes one or more acyltransferases (Neuwald, 1997), lipid studies in patients with Barth syndrome showed a deficiency of cardiolipin, especially its tetralinoleoyl form (L4-CL) (Vreken et al., 2000). Deficiency of L4-CL was subsequently demonstrated in a variety of tissues from patients with Barth syndrome (Schlame et al., 2002), with determination in platelets or cultured skin fibroblasts being the most specific biochemical test. Barth syndrome was the first identified inborn error of metabolism that directly affects cardiolipin, a component of the inner mitochondrial membrane necessary for proper functioning of the electron transport chain. Barth et al. (2004) found that some patients with Barth syndrome have deficient docosahexaenoic acid and arachidonic acid. They pointed out that the initial impression of a uniformly lethal infantile disorder had to be modified. Age distribution in 54 living patients ranged from neonate to 49 years and peaked around puberty. Mortality was highest in the first 4 years. An update on a family with affected members in 3 successive generations and by inference in 2 earlier generations reported by Barth et al. (1983) was provided. |Barth (2005) traced the medical history of X-linked cardioskeletal myopathy and neutropenia (Barth syndrome) to studies in the 1970s that suggested an X-linked mode of inheritance for some families with so-called endocardial fibroelastosis, a term for the pearly-white fibrotic endocardium seen at autopsy in affected individuals; this descriptive term fell into disuse when the emphasis shifted to the study of cardiac dynamics with the advent of echocardiography, with the focus on dilated cardiomyopathy. BTHS commonly presents in infancy with 1 of the following symptoms: failure to thrive, primarily due to dilated cardiomyopathy; delayed motor milestones, with proximal muscle weakness; or bacterial and/or fungal infections due to neutropenia. Barth (2005) noted that some patients reach adult age; however, there is remarkable intrafamilial variability. Cardiomyopathy and neutropenia are the main causes of high mortality, predominantly in the first 5 years of life. Proximal weakness appears to be present from birth; mild facial weakness can be observed, but there are no difficulties with swallowing, eye movements, or ventilation. There is no progression of muscle weakness and no loss of ambulation. A mild learning disability may form part of the disorder. Increased excretion of 3-methylglutaconic acid is the most characteristic biochemical marker of disease, although it is not invariably present. The neutrophil count can vary between normal and zero. Although no longer needed for diagnosis, histochemical analysis of muscle biopsy most commonly shows an increase of sarcoplasmic fat droplets on oil-red-O staining, with minimal changes to mitochondria seen on electron microscopy; heart muscle mitochondria in BTHS exhibit gross changes in shape, size, and alignment of cristae.|
250951::The category of 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type IV (MGCA4) represents a heterogeneous unclassified group of patients who share mild or intermittent urinary excretion of 3-methylglutaconic acid. MGCA excretion is a nonspecific finding observed in many other disorders caused by defects in mitochondrial energy metabolism (Gunay-Aygun, 2005). |For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, see MGCA1 (250950)|Chitayat et al. (1992) described an 18-year-old man, born of consanguineous Italian parents, with severe psychomotor retardation. At birth, he showed poor growth, was hypotonic, with absent reflexes and respiratory distress. Congenital deformities included bilateral inguinal hernia, undescended testes, subaortic stenosis with biventricular hypertrophy, and right simian crease with left bridged simian crease. He later developed seizures, spasticity, and sensorineural hearing loss. Brain MRI showed cerebellar hypoplasia. Laboratory studies showed mild 3-methylglutaconic and 3-methylglutaric aciduria. The features were inconsistent with other known forms of MGCA, and the authors chose to designate this patient as having '3-methylglutaconic aciduria type IV.' Chitayat et al. (1992) noted that the MGCA excretion was likely a marker for an as yet unidentified primary metabolic disorder. |Wortmann and Morava (2011) stated that dysmorphic features are commonly present in patients with MGCA4. Most of the dysmorphism appears during the course of the disease, secondary to basal ganglia involvement (mask-like facies), muscle wasting of the facial musculature, and hypotonia, leading to an elongation of the face and long, prominent ears. Wortmann and Morava (2011) noted that some of the facial features, such as broad and tall forehead and curved eyebrows, are comparable to those described in Barth syndrome (302060). |
617698::3-methylglutaconic aciduria type IX (MGCA9) is caused by homozygous mutation in the TIMM50 gene (607381) on chromosome 19q13.|MGCA9 is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by early-onset seizures, severely delayed psychomotor development and intellectual disability. Patients have hypotonia or spasticity, and laboratory investigations show increased serum lactate and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, suggestive of a mitochondrial defect (summary by Shahrour et al., 2017). For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, see MGCA type I (250950).|Shahrour et al. (2017) reported 4 patients from 2 unrelated consanguineous families with an epileptic encephalopathy. The patients presented in the first months of life with seizures after a normal neonatal period. In 1 family, the seizures were associated with hypsarrhythmia on electroencephalogram (EEG), whereas in the other family, EEG showed mild abnormalities or depressed background activity. The seizures showed a favorable response to medication. The patients had hypotonia and delayed psychomotor development with delayed walking, severe intellectual disability, and poor or absent speech. Brain imaging showed progressive bilateral widening of the ventricles, consistent with brain atrophy. Laboratory investigations showed mildly increased serum lactate and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. Two sibs in the first family showed failure to thrive in childhood and optic atrophy. In the first family, a 9-year-old girl was not toilet trained and was profoundly retarded, aggressive, restless, and unable to communicate. Brain imaging showed some white matter abnormalities. In the second family, a 15-year-old could walk and climb stairs but was unable to feed himself, had only 10 words, and was hyperactive and aggressive. His 10-year-old sister was not toilet trained, had no communication, showed failure to thrive with muscle weakness, spasticity, increased muscle tone, and clonus, and behaved aggressively. Brain imaging of this patient showed generalized atrophy and white matter signal abnormalities. Muscle biopsy from 1 patient in the first family showed normal activity of mitochondrial respiratory enzymes, whereas muscle biopsy from 1 patient in the second family showed decreased activity of complex V (54% of controls). Shahrour et al. (2017) noted that 3MGA is an important biomarker for mitochondrial dysfunction. |
610198::3-methylglutaconic aciduria type V (MGCA5), also called dilated cardiomyopathy with ataxia, is caused by homozygous mutation in the DNAJC19 gene (608977) on chromosome 3q26.|3-Methylglutaconic aciduria type V is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by the onset of dilated or noncompaction cardiomyopathy in infancy or early childhood. Many patients die of cardiac failure. Other features include microcytic anemia, growth retardation, mild ataxia, mild muscle weakness, genital anomalies in males, and increased urinary excretion of 3-methylglutaconic acid. Some patients may have optic atrophy or delayed psychomotor development (summary by Davey et al., 2006 and Ojala et al., 2012). For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, see MGCA type I (250950).|Davey et al. (2006) reported 18 patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and ataxia from 11 consanguineous Canadian Dariusleut Hutterite families. Affected individuals had severe, early-onset dilated cardiomyopathy (sometimes accompanied by long QT syndrome), prenatal or postnatal growth failure, and cerebellar ataxia causing significant motor delays. Genital anomalies secondary to testicular dysgenesis were seen in 9 of 11 male patients, ranging from isolated cryptorchidism to severe perineal hypospadias. Affected patients consistently showed 5- to 10-fold increases in both plasma and urine 3-methylglutaconic acid and 3-methylglutaric acid. Additional features included normochromic microcytic anemia in 12 patients, mild to borderline nonprogressive mental retardation in 10, a mild increase in hepatic enzymes with microvesicular hepatic steatosis in 5, and optic atrophy in 4. The onset of cardiomyopathy was always before the age of 3 years, and over 70% of affected individuals died from either progressive cardiac failure or sudden cardiac death. |Sparkes et al. (2007) retrospectively reviewed the clinical course of 17 Hutterite patients reported by Davey et al. (2006). Of the 17, 13 (76%) had an echocardiographic or pathologic diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy with a mean age at onset of 12 months (range, 1-36 months). The cardiomyopathy was characterized by increased left ventricular end diastolic dimensions, mural thinning, and poor systolic function, with mild to severe global hypokinesia. Ten children died of congestive heart failure or arrhythmias at a mean age of 22 months (range, 4-48 months). Two males, aged 13 and 23 years, had resolution of the cardiomyopathy with only mild residual mitral regurgitation. Another male patient had persistent but clinically stable mild cardiomyopathy at age 15 years. Four patients did not develop cardiomyopathy. Electrocardiographic findings of 13 patients showed a prolonged QT interval in 8 patients, both in the presence (6) and absence (2) of dilated cardiomyopathy. One of the patients with isolated long QT died suddenly at age 14 months. |Ojala et al. (2012) reported 2 Finnish brothers, born of unrelated parents, with MGCA5. Shortly after birth, both showed growth retardation, hypoglycemia, and microcytic anemia. Both patients developed symptomatic noncompaction cardiomyopathy with a prolonged QT interval. The older brother showed mildly delayed psychomotor development, mild ataxia, muscle weakness, and a gradual deterioration of fine motor skills. Laboratory studies showed high urinary excretion of methylglutaconic acid, mild urinary excretion of 3-methylglutarate, mildly increased urinary lactate, and a mild increase in plasma alanine aminotransferase. Muscle biopsy showed mild neutral lipid accumulation and partial deficiency of mitochondrial respiratory chain function. The older brother was doing well at age 49 months. The younger brother had cryptorchidism and chorda penis. Urinary organic acid analysis was normal in this patient at age 10 months. Despite intensive treatment, he died of cardiac failure at age 13 months. Postmortem examination showed a mildly atrophic brainstem with reduction of neuronal density in the cerebellum, as well as a dilated and noncompacted cardiac left ventricle. |
614739::3-methylglutaconic aciduria with deafness, encephalopathy, and Leigh-like syndrome (MEGDEL), also referred to as 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type VI (MGCA6), is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SERAC1 gene (614725) on chromosome 6q25.|MEGDEL is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by childhood onset of delayed psychomotor development or psychomotor regression, sensorineural deafness, spasticity or dystonia, and increased excretion of 3-methylglutaconic acid. Brain imaging shows cerebral and cerebellar atrophy as well as lesions in the basal ganglia reminiscent of Leigh syndrome (256000). Laboratory studies show increased serum lactate and alanine, mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation defects, abnormal mitochondria, abnormal phosphatidylglycerol and cardiolipin profiles in fibroblasts, and abnormal accumulation of unesterified cholesterol within cells (summary by Wortmann et al., 2012). About 50% of patients develop severe, but transient, liver dysfunction and/or signs of liver failure, in the neonatal period or during the first year of life, prompting some authors to suggest the name 'MEGDHEL' syndrome, with the 'H' referring to 'hepatopathy' (summary by Maas et al., 2017). Some patients may have a milder presentation with juvenile-onset spasticity and mild cognitive impairment, indicating a broader phenotypic spectrum (Roeben et al., 2018). For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, see MGCA type I (250950).|Wortmann et al. (2006, 2009) reported 4 unrelated girls with an encephalomyopathy associated with mildly and intermittently increased urinary 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. Three children were born of 3 unrelated sets of consanguineous Turkish parents, and the fourth child was born of unrelated Dutch parents. All presented in the neonatal period with severe infections and had episodes of lactic acidosis and hypoglycemia. Other features included failure to thrive, loss of motor skills, mental retardation, sensorineural deafness, and hypotonia with progressive spasticity. One patient had delayed development, 1 did not develop at all, and the other 2 showed developmental regression during early childhood. Brain MRI showed cerebral and cerebellar atrophy as well as bilateral hyperintensities in the basal ganglia reminiscent of Leigh syndrome. Mitochondrial complex I deficiency was found in muscle and fibroblasts. Two patients died at age 3 and 16 years, respectively. Genetic analysis did not find mutations in several candidate genes. |Wortmann et al. (2012) reported 11 additional patients with MEGDEL, including 2 relatives of 1 of the Turkish patients reported by Wortmann et al. (2006). The phenotype was relatively homogeneous, with psychomotor retardation, spasticity or dystonia, sensorineural deafness, Leigh syndrome-like lesions on brain imaging, and brain atrophy. Laboratory studies showed 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, increased serum lactate, and defects in oxidative phosphorylation. Patient fibroblasts showed an increased phosphatidylglycerol 34:1 to phosphatidylglycerol 36:1 ratio as well as abnormal cardiolipin subspecies. There was abnormal intracellular accumulation of unesterified cholesterol, and some patients had low serum cholesterol. |Sarig et al. (2013) reported 4 males, 2 each from 2 unrelated, highly consanguineous families, with features consistent with MEGDEL syndrome, including 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, sensorineural deafness, encephalopathy, and brain magnetic resonance imaging with findings consistent with Leigh-like syndrome. All 4 patients presented at age 24 to 48 hours with hypotonia and evidence of liver dysfunction, including symptomatic hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, elevated serum transaminase levels, coagulopathy, hyperammonemia, and markedly elevated serum alpha-fetoprotein. During periods of acute infection in the first year of life, the patients experienced a few episodes of liver dysfunction, but these episodes did not recur later in life. Electron microscopy of a liver biopsy from 1 patient showed hepatocyte steatosis with mitochondrial ultrastructural changes, consistent with a mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation disorder and abnormal lipid metabolism. The patients subsequently developed features of MEGDEL syndrome. The families were found to have 2 homozygous mutations in the SERAC1 gene that led to decreased or absent gene expression. Sarig et al. (2013) suggested that neonatal liver disease is a component of the phenotypic spectrum of MEGDEL syndrome and proposed that the disease be renamed MEGDHEL syndrome. |Tort et al. (2013) reported a girl, born of unrelated parents, with MEGDEL. She presented on the fourth day of life with respiratory distress, refusal to feed, and jaundice, and was found to have metabolic acidosis with ketonuria, hyperammonemia, and elevated liver enzymes. During the first few years of life, she developed oral dyskinesia, hypotonia, truncal ataxia, episodic ketotic hypoglycemia, and psychomotor deterioration. Brain imaging showed features typical of Leigh syndrome. Urinary analysis showed 3-methylglutaconic and 3-methylglutaric aciduria. Sensorineural deafness and optic atrophy became apparent in her teenage years. At age 19 years, she was severely affected, with microcephaly, poor communication skills, inability to hold up her head, and multiple joint problems. |Maas et al. (2017) reviewed the clinical features of 67 patients with MEGDHEL, including 39 previously unreported individuals. Most (64%) of the families were consanguineous. Most of the individuals were of European ancestry, although several dozen patients were from Africa, Asia, the Middle East, or Australia, indicating that MEGDHEL is a panethnic disorder. With the exception of 2 families with a milder phenotype and onset later in childhood, all affected individuals showed a strikingly homogeneous phenotype and time course. Sixteen patients died at a median age of 9 years, mostly due to respiratory infections. In the neonatal period, 48% of patients showed liver dysfunction and hypoglycemia, with variable abnormal liver enzymes, increased bilirubin, and disturbed coagulation in the more severe cases. Signs of hepatic dysfunction during the first year of life were common in this group, but resolved afterwards. Other presenting symptoms of the disorder included neonatal sepsis, hypotonia, and delayed motor development. The majority of patients lost previously acquired skills in the first year of life. Patients had early-onset progressive spasticity, dystonia, and oropharyngeal dyskinesia, and most (78%) never learned to walk. All had intellectual disability that varied from mild (12%) to severe (73%), and nearly all (93%) were completely dependent for activities of daily living. Additional features included epilepsy (35%), sensorineural hearing impairment (79%), absent speech (58%), impaired vision (42%), retinal pigmentary changes (6%), optic atrophy (25%), recurrent respiratory infections (42%), scoliosis (39%), and poor feeding (79%), often necessitating tube feeding. Less common features included transient renal tubular dysfunction (12%) and cardiac abnormalities (7%). Laboratory studies showed increased urinary 3-MGA and increased serum lactate, and brain imaging showed lesions in the basal ganglia, consistent with Leigh syndrome. Maas et al. (2017) concluded that MEGDHEL is best classified as a disorder of the biosynthesis of complex lipids with secondary mitochondrial dysfunction, although MEGDHEL syndrome displays typical findings and the progressive course of a mitochondrial disorder. However, mitochondrial dysfunction in tissue varies greatly and may be unremarkable. |Roeben et al. (2018) reported a large consanguineous Iraqi kindred in which 6 individuals from 2 different family branches had a relatively mild form of MEGDEL, which was characterized by the authors as 'juvenile-onset complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia' (SPG). The patients ranged in age from 10 to 27 years. All patients were noted to have mild cognitive delay with learning disability and reduced verbal fluency between 2 and 7 years of age. In family branch I, 3 sibs had slowly progressive lower limb spasticity starting in adolescence, but retained the ability to walk. These 3 patients also had febrile seizures. The youngest sib, examined at age 10, did not show spasticity, seizures, or any neurologic signs besides mild cognitive impairment. In family branch II, both affected sibs presented with juvenile-onset progressive spasticity, which progressed more quickly to tetraspasticity. These individuals also had additional abnormalities, including dystonia, progressive speech reduction, and dysphagia. One 33-year-old sib had a sensorimotor mixed axonal and demyelinating peripheral neuropathy. Brain imaging of 5 individuals showed T2-hyperintensities in the basal ganglia, consistent with Leigh-like syndrome, and urine analysis of 2 patients showed a 10-fold increase of 3-MGA. None of the patients had optic atrophy, deafness, or a history of liver failure; history from the neonatal period was not available. Whole-exome sequencing identified a homozygous intronic variant in the SERAC1 gene (614725.0007). The mutation was confirmed by Sanger sequencing and segregated with the disorder in the family. Patient cells showed aberrant splicing and absence of the full-length SERAC1 protein, as well as impaired prostaglandin remodeling activity compared to wildtype. However, the prostaglandin imbalances were milder than those observed in patients with the classic infantile-onset disease, suggesting a basis for the milder phenotype in the Iraqi family. The findings expanded the phenotype resulting from SERAC1 mutations, showing a clinical spectrum of severity. |
616271::3-methylglutaconic aciduria with cataracts, neurologic involvement, and neutropenia (MEGCANN), also referred to as 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type VII (MGCA7), is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the CLPB gene (616254) on chromosome 11q13.|3-Methylglutaconic aciduria with cataracts, neurologic involvement, and neutropenia (MEGCANN) is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism characterized primarily by increased levels of 3-methylglutaconic acid (3-MGA) associated with neurologic deterioration and neutropenia. The phenotype is highly variable: most patients have infantile onset of a progressive encephalopathy with various movement abnormalities and delayed psychomotor development, although rare patients with normal neurologic development have been reported. Other common, but variable, features include cataracts, seizures, and recurrent infections (summary by Wortmann et al., 2015 and Saunders et al., 2015). For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of 3-methylglutaconic aciduria, see MGCA1 (250950).|Wortmann et al. (2015) reported 14 individuals from 9 unrelated families with an inborn error of metabolism characterized by increased urinary excretion of 3-MGA. Additional features were highly variable, with some patients having no neurologic involvement or infections and others having neonatal or even prenatal onset of progressive neurologic symptoms and/or severe neutropenia with progression to leukemia and death in the first months of life. Common features included delayed psychomotor development/variable intellectual disability (12 patients), congenital neutropenia (10 patients), brain atrophy (7 patients), microcephaly (7 patients), movement disorder (7 patients), and cataracts (5 patients). The oldest living patient was 18 years old and the youngest was 2; 6 patients died between 24 days and 46 months of age. The least severely affected children were a pair of sibs ascertained due to neutropenia. One sib had congenital nuclear cataracts and the other had attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder, dyslexia, and dysgraphia; however, both showed normal overall growth and development at ages 8 and 10 years, respectively. Most of the other patients showed neonatal hypotonia that progressed to spasticity, suggesting pyramidal tract dysfunction. Patients with a moderate phenotype had hypotonia, feeding difficulties, microcephaly, delayed psychomotor development, ataxia, and dystonia. Four patients had the most severe phenotype, with onset in utero or at birth of increased muscle tension ('stiff babies'), lack of eye contact, complete absence of development, and death in the first months of life. Eleven patients had swallowing difficulties, and 4 had seizures. Results of brain imaging also varied significantly, and included normal findings, isolated cerebellar atrophy, cerebral atrophy, and abnormalities of the basal ganglia. Ten patients had neutropenia, but only some patients had recurrent severe infections. Two sibs developed acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome, respectively. Less common features, occurring in only a few patients, included facial dysmorphism, cardiomyopathy or hypertrophy, and hypothyroidism. Studies of patient cells did not show defects in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. |Saunders et al. (2015) reported 4 children, including 2 sibs, of Greenlandic descent, and an unrelated child of northern European and Asian descent, with 3-MGA and neutropenia. The 4 children of Greenlandic origin showed regression of psychomotor development after a few months of normal early development; all died within the first years of life. The fifth child presented at birth with growth retardation, microcephaly, rigidity, contractures, and abnormal facial features, and died from respiratory failure on day 8 of life. Additional variable features among all patients included cataracts, hypotonia, extrapyramidal symptoms such as myoclonus, dystonia, choreoathetosis, opisthotonus, and seizures. Bone marrow biopsies showed maturational arrest of granulopoiesis. Brain imaging was either normal or showed cerebral atrophy; 1 patient had lesions in the basal ganglia. |Capo-Chichi et al. (2015) reported 4 sibs, born of consanguineous Cambodian parents, with a severe form of MEGCANN. They did not move or breathe spontaneously at birth. Appendicular tone was increased, and they showed sustained clonic movements induced by minimal tactile stimulation. EEG showed burst suppression. Brain imaging in 1 patient showed gyral simplification. All were ventilator-dependent and died in the first week of life after removal of respiratory support. Laboratory studies showed increased serum lactate, increased urinary 3-methylglutaconic acid and methylglutaric acid, neutropenia, and coagulation defects. Neuropathologic examination showed neuronal loss in several brain regions, diffuse gliosis, and microvacuolization, which are nonspecific changes consistent with a defect in energy metabolism. |
601815::phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency (PHGDHD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the PHGDH gene (606879) on chromosome 1p12.See also Neu-Laxova syndrome (NLS; 256520), an allelic disorder with a much more severe phenotype that usually results in neonatal death.|Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency is an autosomal recessive inborn error of L-serine biosynthesis that is characterized by congenital microcephaly, psychomotor retardation, and seizures (summary by Jaeken et al., 1996). |Jaeken et al. (1996) described the clinical and biochemical features of 2 Turkish brothers who had a defect in the first enzyme of serine biosynthesis (phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase). The sibs were born from a first-cousin union. The authors noted that serine cerebrospinal fluid concentrations were markedly decreased, as were, to a lesser extent, glycine levels. Both sibs exhibited postnatal growth retardation, congenital microcephaly, hypogonadism, and hypertonia, and later showed profound psychomotor retardation and epilepsy. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed evidence of 'dysmyelination.' Symmetric growth retardation at birth and bilateral congenital cataracts were present in 1 brother. Notably, plasma serine and glycine values were occasionally in the normal value range, as were urine organic acids and amino acids. Ophthalmologic examination of the second brother was normal. Decreased activity of phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase in fibroblasts was noted in both sibs (22% and 13% when compared to controls). Neither the parents nor the normal sibs were tested. Jaeken et al. (1996) noted that although serine is a nonessential amino acid, as it can be synthesized de novo from phosphoglycerate as well as glycine, it appears essential for normal brain function as it plays a role in the biosynthetic reactions of brain constituents such as protein, glycine, cysteine, serine phospholipids, sphingomyelins, and cerebrosides. The authors compared this enzyme deficiency to other 'anabolic' aminoacidopathies such as arginase deficiency (207800) in the urea cycle, homocysteinemia, and phenylketonuria (261600) and contrasted it with the more common 'catabolic' defects of amino acid metabolism. |
260005::5-oxoprolinase deficiency can be caused by heterozygous or homozygous mutation in the OPLAH gene (614243) on chromosome 8q24.|5-Oxoprolinuria can be caused by genetic defects in either of 2 enzymes involved in the gamma-glutamyl cycle of glutathione metabolism: glutathione synthetase (GSS; 601002) or 5-oxoprolinase (OPLAH; 614243). GSS deficiency (266130) is best characterized as an inborn error of glutathione metabolism, but there is debate as to whether OPLAH deficiency represents a disorder or simply a biochemical condition with no adverse clinical effects because patients lack a consistent clinical picture apart from 5-oxoprolinuria (summary by Calpena et al., 2013). |Larsson et al. (1981) reported the cases of 2 brothers, aged 16 and 11, who had enterocolitis and urolithiasis and exhibited excessive excretion of 5-oxo-L-proline. They had had recurrent episodes of vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain, starting in infancy. Urinary stones in 1 of the brothers contained calcium oxalate and carbonate. One patient had a plasma 5-oxoproline level of about 0.18 mM. They had normal erythrocyte glutathione levels and did not show acidosis, neurologic symptoms, or hemolysis. The glutathione synthetase activities of erythrocytes, leukocytes, and cultured skin fibroblasts were within normal limits (see 266130), as was also the activity of erythrocyte gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase (see 601176). The cultured skin fibroblasts of both brothers and the leukocytes of one of them exhibited very low levels of 5-oxoprolinase. The activity in the cells of the parents had a level intermediate between those of the brothers and controls. |Roesel et al. (1981) found 5-oxoprolinase deficiency in a woman who was found to excrete large quantities of 5-oxoproline when she was studied in connection with her child who had prolinemia and birth defects. The father and the child had daily urinary 5-oxoproline excretion that was less than 1 mM/day. The mother's plasma 5-oxoproline level was 9 times greater than that in controls. Cultured skin fibroblasts had about 2% of control values of 5-oxoprolinase. Although the urinary excretion of 5-oxoproline and the level of depression of 5-oxoprolinase activity was about the same in all 3 patients, the clinical findings were different. See Meister and Larsson (1989). |Henderson et al. (1993) described a 2-year-old boy who developed transient hypoglycemia 8 hours after birth and was found on subsequent evaluation to have markedly elevated urinary concentrations of 5-oxoproline. Hematologic investigation revealed no abnormality, and he had normal levels of glutathione synthetase (GSS; 601002) and normal activities of gamma-glutamyl cyclotransferase (GGCT; 137170) and gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase. However, the leukocyte level of 5-oxoprolinase activity was markedly reduced. The boy remained in good health and exhibited normal growth and psychomotor development, with no evidence of acidosis, hypoglycemia, or other metabolic disturbance. Family studies revealed that his clinically unaffected 6-year-old brother also excreted large amounts of 5-oxoproline. |Almaghlouth et al. (2012) reported a 10-month-old Indian boy, born of first-cousin parents, who had transient hypoglycemia at birth and was also found to have indirect hyperbilirubinemia and mild metabolic acidemia. Extended newborn screening revealed moderately elevated 5-oxoproline in the urine. Repeated blood gas measurements were normal, but he continued to have elevated 5-oxoproline levels in the urine. Motor, social, and cognitive development were normal for age. He had an 8-year-old sister with no known medical problems. |Calpena et al. (2013) studied a 1-year-old Indian girl, born of nonconsanguineous parents, who presented at 1.5 months of age with repeated episodes of respiratory difficulties with perioral cyanosis while breastfeeding, accompanied by generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Evaluation revealed vitamin D deficiency with hypocalcemia, increased phosphate levels, elevated PTH (168450), and metabolic acidosis. General and neurologic examinations were normal between episodes, and EEG and brain ultrasound were normal. Vitamin D and B12 supplementation was provided with normalization of all altered biochemical parameters and normal development at 1 year of age. Urinary organic acids were analyzed 3 times, showing increased pyroglutamic acid excretion twice during decompensation, with normalization at 1 year of age. Calpena et al. (2013) also studied an 8-year-old boy with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (310200) and a known deletion in the dystrophin gene (300377), who was incidentally found to have massive urinary excretion of pyroglutamic acid. Blood glutathione levels were normal in both children, and no causes of secondary increased excretion of pyroglutamate were detected. |
261640::tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)-deficient hyperphenylalaninemia due to PTS deficiency (HPABH4A) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding 6-pyruvoyl-tetrahydropterin synthase (PTS; 612719).|Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)-deficient hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) comprises a genetically heterogeneous group of progressive neurologic disorders caused by autosomal recessive mutations in the genes encoding enzymes involved in the synthesis or regeneration of BH4. BH4 is a cofactor for phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH; 612349), tyrosine hydroxylase (TH; 191290) and tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH1; 191060), the latter 2 of which are involved in neurotransmitter synthesis. The BH4-deficient HPAs are characterized phenotypically by hyperphenylalaninemia, depletion of the neurotransmitters dopamine and serotonin, and progressive cognitive and motor deficits (Dudesek et al., 2001). |HPABH4A, caused by mutations in the PTS gene, represents the most common cause of BH4-deficient hyperphenylalaninemia (Dudesek et al., 2001). Other forms of BH4-deficient HPA include HPABH4B (233910), caused by mutation in the GCH1 gene (600225), HPABH4C (261630), caused by mutation in the QDPR gene (612676), and HPABH4D (264070), caused by mutation in the PCBD1 gene (126090). Niederwieser et al. (1982) noted that about 1 to 3% of patients with hyperphenylalaninemia have one of these BH4-deficient forms. These disorders are clinically and genetically distinct from classic phenylketonuria (PKU; 261600), caused by mutation in the PAH gene. |Two additional disorders associated with BH4 deficiency and neurologic symptoms do not have overt hyperphenylalaninemia as a feature: dopa-responsive dystonia (612716), caused by mutation in the SPR gene (182125), and autosomal dominant dopa-responsive dystonia (DYT5; 128230), caused by mutation in the GCH1 gene. Patients with these disorders may develop hyperphenylalaninemia when stressed.|Kaufman et al. (1978) studied a boy with what appeared to be classic phenylketonuria who showed neurologic abnormalities, including hypotonia and delayed motor development, despite good dietary control of blood levels of phenylalanine from the age of 25 days. Tetrahydrobiopterin was only 10% of normal in liver, and serum and urinary levels of biopterin-like compounds were low. Furthermore, serum biopterin did not increase with phenylalanine load, as it would in both normal individuals and in patients with PKU. A defect in biopterin synthesis was postulated. Phenylalanine loading showed the mother to be a heterozygote. The father was considered to be intermediate between normal and heterozygous. Similar cases were reported by Rey et al. (1977) and Milstien et al. (1977). |Using an assay for PTS activity in red blood cells, Niederwieser et al. (1987) identified 4 patients in 3 families with 'peripheral' tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency. They were characterized biochemically by a BH4-responsive hyperphenylalaninemia, a high neopterin:biopterin ratio in urine and plasma, but normal or even elevated concentrations of neurotransmitter metabolites in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The authors concluded that although residual PTS activity was sufficient to cover modest BH4 requirements of tyrosine hydroxylase and tryptophan hydroxylase in the brain, it was not enough to cover the much higher BH4 requirements of PAH in the liver, depending on the phenylalanine intake, protein turnover, and age. Thus, the so-called peripheral form results in hyperphenylalaninemia with only mild or no neurologic symptoms. |Scriver et al. (1987) reported deficient red cell PTS activity as the cause of persistent postnatal hyperphenylalaninemia in 4 probands and 1 sib. The metabolic findings were associated with a benign clinical presentation and normal biopterin levels in cerebrospinal fluid in the newborn period. Impaired development was apparent at 3 months in 1 proband not treated early. Treatment with oral BH4 restored adequate phenylalanine hydroxylase activity; it also maintained or improved CNS function. Red cell activity of PTS in homozygotes or compound heterozygotes was less than 10% of normal. Obligatory heterozygotes in some instances showed levels of enzyme activity lower than expected, suggesting genetic heterogeneity at the PTS locus. |Dhondt et al. (1988) described a patient with clinical features similar to those of the peripheral form of BH4 deficiency: hyperphenylalaninemia with an increase in neopterin to biopterin ratio in the urine, decrease in blood phenylalanine levels on tetrahydrobiopterin loading, biopterin and neurotransmitter metabolite levels within the normal range in the CSF, and a clinically normal appearance at 9 months with minimal neurologic signs on elevation of the plasma phenylalanine levels. In this patient, an unidentified pteridine-like compound was found in the urine and in the CSF, leading the authors to suggest the existence of an unidentified block in the biopterin biosynthetic pathway. |Dudesek et al. (2001) reported long-term follow-up information on 5 patients with PTS deficiency from 4 different families and provided a review of the disorder. Patients with BH4 deficiency resulting from a defect in the PTS gene presented with neurologic signs linked to impaired catecholamines and serotonin synthesis. Most infants were born small for gestational age, and most were seen at an average age of 4 months, although symptoms sometimes became evident in the first weeks of life. Frequent symptoms of PTS deficiency resembled those of Parkinson disease (PD; 168600), indicating a lack of dopamine in the basal ganglia. Extrapyramidal signs included characteristic truncal hypotonia, increased limb tone, postural instability, hypokinesia, choreatic or dystonic limb movements, gait difficulties, hypersalivation due to swallowing difficulties, and oculogyric crises. There were 2 main phenotypes. The more common was the severe 'central' form, accompanied by abnormalities of biogenic amines in the CSF. These patients required a combined treatment of BH4 and neurotransmitter precursors, and needed monotherapy with BH4 in order to maintain normal plasma phenylalanine levels. In contrast, the rare mild 'peripheral' (atypical) form of PTS deficiency was characterized by normal neurotransmitter homeostasis and moderate or transient hyperphenylalaninemia. In patients with the mild peripheral form, hyperphenylalaninemia did not recur when BH4 therapy was discontinued. |
200100::abetalipoproteinemia is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the MTP gene (157147) on chromosome 4q23.|See familial hypobetalipoproteinemia (FHBL; 615558) for a similar disorder caused by mutation in the APOB gene (107730).|Abetalipoproteinemia and familial hypobetalipoproteinemia (FBHL; 615558) are rare diseases characterized by hypocholesterolemia and malabsorption of lipid-soluble vitamins leading to retinal degeneration, neuropathy, and coagulopathy. Hepatic steatosis is also common. The root cause of both disorders is improper packaging and secretion of apolipoprotein B-containing particles. Obligate heterozygous parents of ABL patients usually have normal lipids consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance, whereas obligate heterozygous parents of FBHL patients typically have half normal levels of apoB-containing lipoproteins consistent with autosomal codominant inheritance (summary by Lee and Hegele, 2014). |Features are celiac syndrome, pigmentary degeneration of the retina, progressive ataxic neuropathy, and a peculiar 'burr-cell' malformation of the red cells called acanthocytosis. Intestinal absorption of lipids is defective, serum cholesterol very low, and serum beta lipoprotein absent. Almost all of the earlier reported patients were Jewish. For example, the first case was that of an 18-year-old Jewish girl referred to the Consultation Service at the Mt. Sinai Hospital in New York City for diagnostic studies (Bassen and Kornzweig, 1950). The picture was that of Friedreich ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa with red cells of bizarre shapes. The girl had also had protracted steatorrhea from childhood, and a 9-year-old brother had red cells of the same type and early retinal pigmentary changes. For the peculiar red cells, Singer et al. (1952) conferred the designation 'acanthrocytes,' later changed to 'acanthocytes' by Druez (1959). |Autopsy (Sobrevilla et al., 1964) and biopsy of peripheral nerves showed extensive central and peripheral demyelination. |Many of the manifestations of this disorder are the consequence of vitamin E deficiency, and treatment with vitamin E is recommended (Muller et al., 1977; Azizi et al., 1978; Muller and Lloyd, 1982). |Spinocerebellar degeneration occurs with various forms of chronic intestinal malabsorption, including that of cholestatic liver disease and of Crohn disease (Harding et al., 1982). Despite the absence of low density lipoproteins and chylomicron fragments from the plasma of patients with abetalipoproteinemia, the rates of cholesterol synthesis and the number of LDL receptors expressed on freshly isolated cells are not markedly increased. |Glickman et al. (1979) had found absence of apoB immunoreactivity in the enterocytes of 2 abetalipoproteinemia patients and had postulated a genetic defect in the synthesis of apoB. The results of Dullaart et al. (1986) suggest a defect in secretion of apoB or a failure of appropriate secretion with lipids in both liver and intestine. |Pathologic implications of apolipoprotein B were discussed by Brunzell et al. (1983) and by Sniderman et al. (1980). |Lackner et al. (1986) found a massive increase of apoB-100 mRNA in ABL hepatocytes, and the synthesis of apoB, or an apoB-like protein, which is not secreted by the cells. The first result suggested that the apoB-100 gene is considerably up-regulated in this disorder. An abnormally low plasma LDL concentration may be the stimulus. ABL must not be due to a promoter or enhancer defect, because in that case an abnormally low mRNA level would be expected. Neither Southern nor Northern blots revealed any insertions or deletions within the gene, nor did they provide any evidence for a splicing defect. Blackhart et al. (1986) found no abnormality of the APOB gene on Southern blot analysis, but found increased amounts of mRNA and apoB protein in hepatocytes. Blackhart et al. (1986) and Ross et al. (1988) proposed that the molecular defect in abetalipoproteinemia involves defective cellular secretion of the protein. The mutation could be either in the APOB gene itself or in some other product necessary for apoB secretion. |Liver disease is an unusual feature of abetalipoproteinemia. In some patients steatosis of the liver has been found, and in a few patients liver cirrhosis has been observed. In these cases, medium chain triglyceride (MCT) complementation has been implicated as a cause of liver disease (Illingworth et al., 1980; Partin et al., 1974). Braegger et al. (1998) described a 16-year-old girl with abetalipoproteinemia who underwent liver transplantation for hepatic cirrhosis. After this procedure, her serum lipoprotein profile was corrected; however, fat malabsorption and steatorrhea persisted because the primary defect, a mutant MTP, remained expressed in the intestine. |
604290::aceruloplasminemia is caused by mutation in the gene encoding ceruloplasmin (CP; 117700).|Aceruloplasminemia|Logan et al. (1994) reported 2 brothers with complete ceruloplasmin deficiency who presented in their late forties with dementia and diabetes mellitus. The proband had been admitted to hospital at the age of 49 years with a 6-week history of thirst and polyuria and a 2-week history of progressive confusion. Neurologic examination was normal. He was started on a diabetic diet and oral sulfonylurea. At the age of 52, he suddenly left his work one day and was found at home the next day sitting in a chair with the appearance of not having been to bed. When asked why he was not at work he replied, 'What work?' Dementia progressed thereafter, confusion occurring episodically. The younger brother, who worked as a railway laborer, developed diabetes and mental slowing at the age of 47 years. The symptoms seemed to have developed over a period of days and were progressive thereafter. Twelve relatives had partial ceruloplasmin deficiency. Both brothers had low serum iron and increased liver iron, and there was no copper overload. Transmission of the abnormality was autosomal recessive. The abnormal ceruloplasmin in this case was referred to as ceruloplasmin Belfast. |Morita et al. (1992) described a 55-year-old patient with complete ceruloplasmin deficiency who presented with dementia, diabetes, torticollis, chorea, and ataxia. A postmortem study of this proband demonstrated excessive iron deposition, mainly in the brain, liver, and pancreas. Morita et al. (1995) reported a clinical pathologic study of the family reported by Morita et al. (1992), which contained 3 affected sibs of consanguineous parents. Clinical symptoms were progressive dementia, extrapyramidal disorders, cerebellar ataxia, and diabetes mellitus, all of which appeared when they were between 30 and 50 years old. All had almost completely absent levels of serum ceruloplasmin and increased serum ferritin (see 134790) concentrations. The dentate nucleus, thalamus, putamen, caudate nucleus, and liver of each patient showed low signal intensities on T1- and T2-weighted MRIs. Autopsy revealed severe destruction of the basal ganglia and dentate nucleus with considerable iron deposition in neuronal and glial cells, whereas the cerebral cortex showed mild iron deposition in glial cells without neuronal involvement. Iron deposition in hepatocytes and in neural and glial cells of the brain was demonstrated by electron microscopy with energy-dispersive x-ray analysis. |Harris et al. (1995) reported a 61-year-old Japanese woman who had had retinal degeneration and blepharospasm for the previous 10 years. She had also developed cogwheel rigidity and dysarthria. Her 51-year-old sister, who was asymptomatic at the time of the original presentation despite undetectable CP, had recent onset of retinal degeneration and basal ganglia symptoms. In each case, the absence of serum CP was associated with mild anemia, low serum iron, and elevated serum ferritin. Magnetic resonance imaging studies demonstrated changes in the basal ganglia suggestive of elevated iron content in the brain. The patient's daughter was entirely asymptomatic but had a serum CP concentration that was 50% of normal, consistent with an obligate heterozygote. There was no consanguinity in the family. Liver biopsy confirmed the presence of excess iron. |Takahashi et al. (1996) reported a kindred with aceruloplasminemia. Their patient was a 45-year-old woman who came to attention after a several-month history of difficulty in walking and slurring of speech. She had previously been in excellent health with the exception of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus beginning at age 31 years. Physical examination revealed ataxic gait, scanning speech, and retinal degeneration. MRI of the brain was consistent with increased basal ganglia iron content, and laboratory studies revealed a low serum iron concentration and no detectable serum ceruloplasmin. |Okamoto et al. (1996) reviewed the findings in 4 pedigrees with aceruloplasminemia. Clinical manifestations, which occurred after middle age, included extrapyramidal signs, cerebellar ataxia, dementia, and memory loss. Neuroimaging studies revealed iron deposition in the basal ganglia and in the red and dentate nuclei. Diagnostic laboratory findings included deficiency of ceruloplasmin, low serum iron, and high serum ferritin. The hepatic iron content was high, but cirrhosis was not usually present. |Hypoceruloplasminemia|Edwards et al. (1979) studied a kindred in which 14 members had low serum ceruloplasmin and low serum copper without the abnormalities of Wilson disease (277900). The phenotype segregated in a pattern suggesting heterozygosity for a mutant gene. One member of the family with low levels had been followed for over 25 years and had remained completely well. |Miyajima et al. (1987) described a 52-year-old woman with blepharospasm, retinal degeneration, and high density areas in the basal ganglia and liver by CT scan. Studies showed accumulation of iron, not copper, in liver and brain. Serum ceruloplasmin was less than 0.6 mg/dl (normal, 17-37 mg/dl) and serum apoceruloplasmin was undetectable. A sister and a brother demonstrated retinal degeneration and iron deposition in the basal ganglia and liver, respectively. Serum ceruloplasmin was less than 0.8 mg/dl in both cases. |
201100::the zinc deficiency type of acrodermatitis enteropathica (AEZ) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SLC39A4 gene (607059) on chromosome 8q24.|Acrodermatitis enteropathica is characterized by intermittent simultaneous occurrence of diarrhea and dermatitis with failure to thrive. Alopecia of the scalp, eyebrows, and eyelashes is a usual feature. The skin lesions are bullous. Noteworthy is the cure by diodoquin, or diiodohydroxyquinoline (Dillaha et al., 1953; Bloom and Sobel, 1955). Rodin and Goldman (1969) described autopsy findings, including pancreatic islet hyperplasia, absence of the thymus and of germinal centers, and plasmocytosis of lymph nodes and spleen. |Garretts and Molokhia (1977) described a patient who had somewhat elevated serum zinc levels, yet the patient responded strikingly with zinc treatment, relapsed with cessation of zinc, and again responded to reinstitution of treatment. |Ohlsson (1981) described a Saudi boy who, despite being breast fed, developed acrodermatitis enteropathica. The mother had zinc deficiency as indicated by low serum levels of zinc. Cranial computed tomography showed marked cortical atrophy that improved on treatment with zinc. |Michalczyk et al. (2003) pointed out that acrodermatitis enteropathica is distinct from zinc deficiency of neonates fed on breast milk (608118) in several ways. Zinc deficiency in breastfed babies is caused by low levels of zinc in the maternal milk, whereas in acrodermatitis enteropathica, the maternal milk is protective and the symptoms of zinc deficiency develop after weaning (Aggett, 1983). No impairment in zinc uptake in the gut was found in the breastfed zinc-deficient babies (Aggett et al., 1980). This is in contrast to acrodermatitis enteropathica, where mucosal zinc uptake in the small intestine of patients is lower than normal. Furthermore, cultured fibroblasts from patients with acrodermatitis enteropathica show decreased uptake of zinc. |See also 601979 for a description of hyperzincemia with functional zinc depletion.|
201400::isolated adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) deficiency (IAD) can be caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the TBX19 gene (604614) on chromosome 1q24.|Congenital isolated adrenocorticotropic hormone deficiency is characterized by severe hypoglycemia in the neonatal period, associated with seizures in about half of cases; prolonged cholestatic jaundice; and very low plasma ACTH levels with no significant response to CRH (122560). Plasma cortisol levels are also extremely low (Vallette-Kasic et al., 2005). TBX19 is required for initiation of transcription of the POMC gene (176830), which produces the precursor peptide from which ACTH is derived (Lamolet et al., 2001). |Hung and Migeon (1968) described a 34-month-old black boy with apparent isolated ACTH deficiency. The adrenal medulla was unresponsive to insulin-induced hypoglycemia. Treatment of the adrenocortical insufficiency restored responsiveness. The enzyme phenylethanolamine-N-methyl transferase (PNMT; 171190) is localized to the adrenal medulla and catalyzes the N-methylation of norepinephrine to epinephrine. The activity of this enzyme is controlled by glucocorticoids. Lucking and Willig (1975) and Malpuech et al. (1988) each described 2 affected sibs. The patients of Malpuech et al. (1988) were brother and sister. The first-born, the male, died; pathologic findings included bilateral adrenal hypoplasia. Plasma estriol levels were assayed during the mother's next pregnancy. Prenatal diagnosis allowed immediate and effective management of this second affected child. In the second infant, echograms showed small adrenals and from age 3 weeks she tolerated fasting poorly. The diagnosis was confirmed by reduced plasma cortisol levels, particularly during attacks of hypoglycemia. Ichiba and Goto (1983) reported 2 affected sisters. |Nussey et al. (1993) investigated a female infant who presented with hypoglycemia in the neonatal period. When studied at 6 weeks of age, she was found to have no measurable ACTH even after injection of corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH; 122560). On the other hand, ACTH precursors were measurable and were stimulated by CRH and suppressed by glucocorticoid administration. By sequencing PCR products from the patient's genomic DNA, the entire coding region of the POMC gene was established to be normal. Nussey et al. (1993) interpreted these results as compatible with a cleavage enzyme defect. As reviewed by Funder and Smith (1993), POMC is cleaved in the anterior pituitary, by an enzyme termed PC1, to yield ACTH and beta-lipotropin. In the brain and pituitary intermediate lobe, the enzyme PC2 cleaves ACTH into products that yield alpha-MSH and CLIP (see 176830) and cleaves beta-LPH into gamma-LPH and beta-endorphin. The human pituitary gland appears to lack an intermediate lobe, except in utero and perhaps in pregnancy; on the other hand, PC2 is present in the human genome and is expressed in neuroendocrine tissues. Funder and Smith (1993) suggested that the patient of Nussey et al. (1993) was either expressing PC2 ectopically in her anterior pituitary or that her PC1 normally expressed in the anterior pituitary had mutated to show a PC2-like pattern of substrate specificity. They also suggested a third intriguing possibility, that of a chimeric gene, with its 5-prime end derived from the PC1 gene and its translated region derived in large part (or entirely) from PC2, giving the tissue localization (and presumably control) characteristic of PC1 and the enzymatic activity of PC2. The precedent they cited was glucocorticoid remediable aldosteronism, which reflects the expression of a chimeric gene (see 103900). |Expanding on a previous report by Vallette-Kasic et al. (2005), Couture et al. (2012) reported 37 patients from 29 families with isolated ACTH deficiency. The patients presented with severe neonatal hypoglycemia, often associated with seizures, and prolonged cholestatic jaundice. Neonatal death occurred in 25% of the families. All patients had very low plasma ACTH and cortisol with normal pituitary imaging. Only 2 patients had partial and transient growth hormone deficiency. |
613070::transient infantile liver failure (LFIT) can be caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the TRMU gene (610230), which is involved in mitochondrial protein translation, on chromosome 22q13.|Acute infantile liver failure resulting from TRMU mutation is a transient disorder of hepatic function. In addition to elevated liver enzymes, jaundice, vomiting, coagulopathy, and hyperbilirubinemia, the presence of increased serum lactate is consistent with a defect in mitochondrial respiratory function. With supportive care, patients who survive the initial acute episode can recover and show normal development (Zeharia et al., 2009). |See also transient infantile mitochondrial myopathy (MMIT; 500009), which is a similar disorder.|A more severe, permanent disorder with some overlapping features is associated with mitochondrial DNA depletion (251880).|See ILFS1 (615438) for information on syndromic infantile liver failure.|Lev et al. (2002) reported an infant, born of unrelated Yemenite Jewish parents, who had fulminant lactic acidosis in the neonatal period. She presented at age 9 weeks with vomiting and metabolic acidosis and was found to have an enlarged liver. During the second week of her illness, she developed progressive hepatic insufficiency, jaundice, ascites, hypersplenism, coagulopathy, increased transaminases, and pancreatic failure. Liver transplant was suggested. Over the next few weeks, the liver abnormalities and lactic acidosis improved. Neurologic status remained intact throughout the illness. Studies of muscle and liver biopsies showed decreased mitochondrial complex IV activity (12% residual activity) in the liver only. Lev et al. (2002) commented on the unusual spontaneous recovery in this patient. |Zeharia et al. (2009) reported 7 unrelated families of Yemenite Jewish origin in which at least 1 family member had acute liver failure in early infancy. All were born at term, had birth weights appropriate for gestational age, and had physiologic hyperbilirubinemia that resolved in a normal manner. All were reportedly healthy during the early neonatal period but were admitted at 2 to 4 months of age with irritability, poor feeding, and vomiting. Physical examination showed pale-gray skin color, jaundiced sclerae, distended abdomen, hepatomegaly, and coagulopathy requiring intensive care. Laboratory studies indicated acute liver failure, with low albumin, direct hyperbilirubinemia, metabolic acidosis, hyperlactatemia, lactic aciduria, and high alpha-fetoprotein. Clinical and biochemical improvement began after 2 to 3 weeks of supportive care, and liver functions returned to normal within 3 to 4 months; however, liver size normalized only after 3 months to 3 years. One patient died of multiple organ failure. Of the 7 patients that survived the acute episode, all were alive and well up to age 14 years. During the acute phase, liver biopsy of 2 patients showed minimal chronic inflammation and mild focal proliferation of bile ductules, with variable portal and sinusoidal fibrosis. There were extensive oncocytic changes in the hepatocytes, as well as focal macrovesicular steatosis and focal ballooning of their cytoplasm. Following identification of the molecular defect in the TRMU gene, the authors identified 5 additional non-Yemenite-Jewish patients with the same disorder. These additional patients were of Algerian, Ashkenazi Jewish, and Arab origin. The presentation was the same, but 3 patients died at ages 2 to 4 months. Zeharia et al. (2009) noted that Lev et al. (2002) may have reported the first case of TRMU deficiency in an Israeli infant of Yemenite-Jewish origin who presented with transient liver failure during infancy. |Uusimaa et al. (2011) reported a 4-year-old Irish girl with transient acute infantile liver failure associated with lactic acidosis and profound cytochrome c oxidase deficiency in muscle and liver samples. Brain MRI showed abnormal high signals in the right thalamus, which disappeared by age 1 year. She also had feeding difficulties and hypotonia in early infancy. Although she recovered, she had mildly delayed walking, axial weakness, and bulbar involvement. Molecular analysis identified compound heterozygous mutations in the TRMU gene (610230.0006 and 610230.0007). |
176000::acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMBS; 609806), also referred to as porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD), on chromosome 11q23.|Porphyrias are inherited defects in the biosynthesis of heme. Acute intermittent porphyria, the most common form of porphyria, is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by recurrent attacks of abdominal pain, gastrointestinal dysfunction, and neurologic disturbances. In the classic form of AIP, both the ubiquitous 'nonerythroid' housekeeping HMBS isoform and the 'erythroid' HMBS isoform are deficient. However, about 5% of families have the 'nonerythroid variant' of AIP, with a defect only in the ubiquitous nonerythroid HMBS isoform and normal levels of the erythroid HMBS isoform. Clinical characteristics in the 2 forms are identical; diagnostic methods based on the level of enzyme in erythrocytes is ineffective (Puy et al., 1998; Petrides, 1998; Whatley et al., 2000). |There are several other forms of porphyria: see porphyria cutanea tarda (176100), variegata porphyria (176200), coproporphyria (121300), acute hepatic porphyria (125270), and congenital erythropoietic porphyria (263700).|Acute intermittent porphyria is characterized clinically by acute episodes of a variety of gastrointestinal and neuropathic symptoms; between episodes, the patient is healthy. Abdominal pain is the most common symptom, sometimes with constipation and urinary retention; paraesthesias and paralysis also occur, and death may result from respiratory paralysis (Goldberg, 1959; Stein and Tschudy, 1970; Becker and Kramer, 1977). Many other phenomena, including seizures, psychotic episodes, and hypertension, may occur in acute attacks. |Acute attacks rarely occur before puberty; they may be precipitated by porphyrinogenic drugs such as barbiturates and sulfonamides (for list, see Tschudy et al., 1975), some of which are known to induce the earlier rate-controlling step in heme synthesis, delta-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) synthesis. Other known precipitants are alcohol, infection, starvation, and hormonal changes; attacks are more common in women. Only about 10 to 20% of AIP gene carriers become symptomatic during their lifetime (Petrides, 1998). |From a survey of AIP cases in the west of Scotland, Laiwah et al. (1983) observed an association with early-onset chronic renal failure. Porphyria-induced hypertension was considered the most likely causal factor, but enhanced susceptibility to analgesic nephropathy and nephrotoxic effects of porphyrins and their precursors were mentioned as possibilities. |Beukeveld et al. (1990) reported a rare case of a child with presumed homozygous AIP who demonstrated porencephaly and severe developmental retardation. The child consistently excreted excessive amounts of delta-aminolevulinic acid, porphobilinogen, and uroporphyrin in her urine from early childhood. She died at age 8 years. Her mother suffered from AIP. Although the father never had attacks, blood and urine studies showed that he too was affected. Using allele-specific oligonucleotides, Picat et al. (1990) demonstrated that the proband reported by Beukeveld et al. (1990) was compound heterozygous for 2 mutations in the HMBS gene (609806.0005; 609806.0006). Each parent was heterozygous for 1 of the mutations. |Hessels et al. (2004) described a 7-year-old boy with homozygous AIP who demonstrated hepatosplenomegaly, mild anemia, mild mental retardation, yellow-brown teeth, and dark red urine and who had excessively elevated levels of urinary delta-aminolevulinic acid, porphobilinogen, and uroporphyrin. Further hepta-, hexa-, penta- and copro(I)porphyrins were highly increased in urine. This pattern of porphyrin precursor and metabolite excretion is characteristic of acute intermittent porphyria. The porphobilinogen deaminase activity in red cells was decreased to 2 to 4%. The parents were unaffected. |Marsden and Rees (2014) measured urine ALA, PBG, and total urine porphyrin (TUP) excretion in 20 patients with AIP following an attack of acute porphyria for 3 months to 23 years after their last documented acute attack. Urinary concentrations of all metabolites remained elevated for many years. The urinary half life of TUP was 5.3 years, ALA 7.7 years, and PBG 10.6 years. Even after 20 years, PBG concentrations remained elevated above the normal range. Marsden and Rees (2014) concluded that whereas measurement of urine PBG is useful to diagnose the first attack of AIP, it is not helpful as a diagnostic tool in subsequent attacks. |McColl et al. (1985) identified a form of acute porphyria in a large family in Chester, U.K. Patients presented with attacks of neurovisceral dysfunction; none had cutaneous photosensitivity. Biochemically, the pattern of excretion of heme precursors varied between individuals. Some had a pattern of acute intermittent porphyria, others showed that of variegate porphyria, and some showed an intermediate pattern. A dual enzyme deficiency was found in peripheral blood cells; reduced activity was found in both PBGD, as in AIP, and protoporphyrinogen oxidase (PPOX; 600923), as in variegate porphyria. McColl et al. (1985) initially thought that this was a new form of porphyria. In the family with Chester type porphyria, Norton et al. (1991, 1993) identified a multipoint maximum lod score of 7.33 at a distance less than 1 cM proximal to D11S351. |In affected members of the original family reported by McColl et al. (1985), Poblete-Gutierrez et al. (2006) identified a heterozygous truncating mutation in the HMBS gene (609806.0046). No mutations were found in the PPOX gene. These findings confirmed that Chester type porphyria is a variant of AIP. Poblete-Gutierrez et al. (2006) suggested that the original biochemical studies indicating PPOX deficiency may have been erroneous or misinterpreted. |
601626::acute myeloid leukemia (AML) can be caused by heterozygous mutation in the CEBPA gene (116897) on chromosome 19p13. One such family has been reported.|Somatic mutations in several genes have been found in cases of AML, e.g., in the CEBPA, ETV6 (600618), JAK2 (147796), KRAS2 (190070), NRAS (164790), HIPK2 (606868), FLT3 (136351), TET2 (612839), ASXL1 (612990), IDH1 (147700), CBL (165360), DNMT3A (602769), NPM1 (164040), SF3B1 (605590), and KIT (164920) genes. Other causes of AML include fusion genes generated by chromosomal translocations; see, for example, 600358 and 159555.|Susceptibility to the development of acute myeloid leukemia may be caused by germline mutations in some genes, including GATA2 (137295), TERC (602322), and TERT (187270).|AML may also be part of the phenotypic spectrum of inherited disorders, including platelet disorder with associated myeloid malignancy (FPDMM; 601399), caused by mutation in the RUNX1 gene (151385), and telomere-related pulmonary fibrosis and/or bone marrow failure (PFBMFT1, 614742 and PFBMFT2, 614743), caused by mutation in the TERT or the TERC gene.|Shields et al. (2003) published a case report on acute myeloid leukemia that presented as bilateral orbital myeloid sarcoma (or chloroma) in a previously healthy 25-month-old boy. Bone marrow biopsy revealed blasts and cells with maturing monocytic features. A final diagnosis of M5b AML was made. The authors reviewed the literature and concluded that leukemia may be the most likely diagnosis in a child with bilateral soft tissue orbital tumors. |
240200::Addison disease falls into the same category as pernicious anemia, systemic lupus erythematosus, myasthenia gravis, and Hashimoto thyroiditis, in which an autoimmune basis is suggested by some evidence and in which familial aggregation occurs. In all these conditions, the role of a single genetic locus in etiology is unclear. The isolated form of Addison disease is less frequent than that combined with other endocrinopathies, particularly hypoparathyroidism (see 240300). A noteworthy feature is the lack of hypoaldosteronism (Stempfel and Engel, 1960; Shepard et al., 1959). Androgen metabolism could not be tested. These cases may well have a defect limited to corticoid metabolism. Some of these cases may with more validity be classed as adrenal unresponsiveness to ACTH (202200).|Berlin (1952) reported Addison disease in brother and sister, the latter having also pernicious anemia. Brochner-Mortensen (1956) described Addison disease in 2 brothers and 2 of their maternal uncles. Meakin et al. (1959) described 2 brothers with onset of adrenal insufficiency at age 3 to 4 years. |Williams and Freeman (1965) reported adrenal cortical hypofunction without salt loss in 3 of 4 children of second-cousin parents. O'Donohoe and Holland (1968) described autopsy-proven adrenal hypoplasia in a sister of 2 affected males. Lemli and Smith (1968) reported affected sisters. The histologic findings differ in the X-linked (300200) and autosomal recessive forms of adrenal hypoplasia. In the former, the adrenal cortex shows disorganization with poor differentiation of cortical zones and presence of scattered clumps of eosinophilic cells. This is sometimes referred to as the cytomegalic type because of the large cells present as the only remaining cortical tissue. In the latter, there is absence or near-absence of both fetal and permanent cortex. This is sometimes called the 'miniature adult' type because the small adrenal cortex consists almost exclusively of permanent cortex. The latter type occurs either sporadically or as an autosomal recessive condition and may occur alone or, as is often the case, accompanied by anomalies of the brain and pituitary gland, as in anencephaly, or with pituitary gland abnormalities alone. Boyd and MacDonald (1960) reported marked hyperplasia of pituitary basophilic cells. Congenital hypoadrenocorticism may be misdiagnosed as 'sudden infant death syndrome.' |In the majority of cases, Addison disease is a component of an autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome, or APS (Gambelunghe et al., 1999). APS1 (240300), a rare disorder, is caused by mutation in the AIRE gene (607358), which resides on chromosome 21. APS2 (269200), more frequently found in adult patients, is a complex multigenic disease. The major histocompatibility complex class I chain-related MICA (600169) and MICB (602436) genes are located on chromosome 6 between the HLA-B (142830) and the B-associated transcript (see 142560) genes. The presence of 21-hydroxylase autoantibodies is a sensitive and specific marker of autoimmune Addison disease. Gambelunghe et al. (1999) evaluated the association of APS2-Addison disease with both MICA and MICB gene polymorphism 28 autoimmune (21-hydroxylase autoantibody-positive) Addison disease patients and in 75 healthy subjects from central Italy. They found evidence for a primary association of autoimmune Addison disease with the exon 5 microsatellite polymorphism of the MICA gene (MICA5.1). The MICA5.1 allele was significantly more frequent in Addison disease patients (79%) than in healthy subjects (36%) whereas MICA6 was significantly reduced in affected subjects. The A5.1/A5.1 genotype had an odds ratio for autoimmune Addison disease as high as 18.0 and an absolute risk of 1 per 1,131. In the presence of MICA5.1, MICB/CA-25 was significantly increased in Addison disease patients (15% vs 56%). The MICB/CA-17 allele was absent in Addison disease patients, but present in more than 25% healthy individuals. Among HLA-DR and -DQ haplotypes, only DRB1*03-DQA1*0501-DQB1*0201 (DR3/DQ2) was significantly more frequent in Addison disease patients than in healthy subjects, but only in the presence of MICA5.1. The authors concluded that susceptibility to autoimmune Addison disease is linked to the MICA microsatellite allele 5.1 and that both MICA5.1 and HLA-DR3/DQ2 are necessary to confer increased genetic risk for Addison disease. |Skinningsrud et al. (2008) presented evidence suggesting an association between autoimmune Addison disease and a 1858C-T SNP (rs2476601) in the PTPN22 gene (600716.0001) on chromosome 1p13. In a metaanalysis of 3 studies, including their own, comprising 563 European patients with the disorder, the authors found an odds ratio of 1.36 (p = 0.003) for carriers of the T allele. |
102700::T cell-negative (T-), B cell-negative (B-), natural killer cell-negative (NK-) severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the adenosine deaminase gene (ADA; 608958) on chromosome 20q13.|For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of autosomal recessive SCID, see 601457.|Inherited ADA deficiency causes a variable phenotypic spectrum, the most severe being SCID presenting in infancy and usually resulting in early death. Ten to 15% of patients have a 'delayed' clinical onset by age 6 to 24 months, and a smaller percentage of patients have 'later' onset, diagnosed from ages 4 years to adulthood, showing less severe infections and gradual immunologic deterioration. Finally, 'partial' ADA deficiency occurs in a subset of immunocompetent individuals who show decreased enzyme activity in erythrocytes, but retain substantial enzyme activity ranging from 5 to 80% of normal in leukocytes and other nucleated cells (Arredondo-Vega et al., 1994). ADA deficiency accounts for approximately 15% of all SCID cases and one-third of cases of autosomal recessive SCID (Hershfield, 2003). |Giblett et al. (1972) reported 2 unrelated girls with impaired cellular immunity and absence of red cell adenosine deaminase activity. One child, aged 22 months, had recurrent respiratory infections, candidiasis, and marked lymphopenia from birth. The other, aged 3.5 years, was allegedly normal in the first 2 years of life. Mild upper respiratory infections began at age 24 months and progressed to severe pulmonary insufficiency and hepatosplenomegaly by age 30 months. The parents of the first child were related and the second child had a sister who died as a result of a major immunologic defect (Hong et al., 1970). The finding that both pairs of parents had an intermediate level of red cell ADA supported recessive inheritance; the parents of the first child had about a 50% level of normal, whereas the parents of the second child had about a 66% level. |Parkman et al. (1975) reported 3 affected infants from 2 families with SCID due to ADA deficiency inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern. None of the infants had detectable erythrocyte ADA activity. Two infants had successful bone marrow transplantation with restoration of normal cellular and humoral immunity, but erythrocytic ADA deficiency persisted. |Reporting on a workshop on SCID due to ADA deficiency, Meuwissen et al. (1975) noted that the phenotype is transmitted as an autosomal recessive disorder. Some patients had characteristic skeletal abnormalities, and all had thymic involution with Hassall's corpuscles and differentiated germinal epithelium. |Hershfield (2003) stated that red cell 2-prime-deoxyadenosine triphosphate (dATP; dAXP), a substrate of adenosine deaminase, is elevated by 30-fold to greater than 1,500-fold in SCID patients.|Santisteban et al. (1993) reported 7 patients with 'delayed' or 'late' onset of SCID due to ADA deficiency. Three of these patients had onset of symptoms at ages 9, 12, and 12 months, respectively, although diagnosis of ADA deficiency was not made until ages 14 months, 2, and 3 years, respectively. Four patients were relatively asymptomatic until ages 2 to 5 years, when recurrent respiratory infections became prominent. ADA activity in cultured T cells and deoxyadenosine nucleotide levels in red cells in all 7 patients were intermediate between typical early-onset SCID patients and immunocompetent individuals with partial ADA deficiency. |Umetsu et al. (1994) reported 2 sisters with SCID due to ADA deficiency. The second-born child presented first with serious infections and failure to thrive at age 4 months; the diagnosis of SCID was made at age 9 months when the child was hospitalized for Pseudomonas sepsis and Pneumocystis pneumonia. Her healthy 39-month-old sister was then tested and found to be ADA deficient. She had an unremarkable history, including normal development and uncomplicated varicella zoster at age 6 months. Although she was lymphopenic, antibody production, delayed hypersensitivity, and in vitro T-cell function were intact. She became more lymphopenic over a period of 6 to 7 months and developed persistent upper respiratory infections. Both sisters were treated by enzyme replacement with polyethylene glycol (PEG)-ADA. |Shovlin et al. (1993) described adult onset of ADA deficiency in 2 sisters who presented with recurrent infections together with laboratory phenotypes similar to those of advanced HIV disease, including severe CD4 lymphopenia. Both were HIV-negative. A 34-year-old woman reported asthma and recurrent chest infections from childhood. As an adult, she had widespread viral warts, recurrent oral and vaginal candidosis, and reported 2 episodes of dermatomal zoster. Her 35-year-old sister was well until age 17 when she developed idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura necessitating splenectomy, azathioprine for 7 years, and prednisolone until the time of report. By age 20 she had asthma, recurrent chest infections, vaginal and oral candidosis, widespread viral warts, and recurrent dermatomal zoster. Both sisters had clinical and radiologic evidence of extensive lung damage. Medical records showed lymphopenia in both sisters from ages 20 and 17 years, respectively. These were the oldest patients ever described with a new diagnosis of primary ADA deficiency. |Ozsahin et al. (1997) reported metabolic, immunologic, and genetic findings in 2 ADA-deficient adults with distinct phenotypes. A 39-year-old woman had combined immunodeficiency with frequent infections, lymphopenia, and recurrent hepatitis as a child, but did relatively well in her second and third decades. She later developed chronic sinopulmonary infections, including tuberculosis, and hepatobiliary disease, and died of viral leukoencephalopathy at 40 years of age. The second patient was a healthy 28-year-old man with normal immune function who was identified after his niece died of SCID. Both adult patients lacked erythrocyte ADA activity, but had only modestly elevated deoxyadenosine nucleotides. |Hershfield (2003) stated that red cell dATP (dAXP) is elevated by 30- to 300-fold in delayed or late-onset patients.|Jenkins (1973) and Jenkins et al. (1976) reported a South African Kalahari San ('Bushman') patient with 'partial' ADA deficiency not associated with immunodeficiency. ADA activity was 2 to 3%, 10 to 12%, and 10 to 30% of normal in red blood cells, white blood cells, and fibroblasts, respectively. Multiple tests showed that the child had normal humoral and cellular immunity. A sib had similar ADA levels and the parents had intermediate levels. In a study of 36 South African populations comprising more than 3,000 individuals, Jenkins et al. (1976) found that many members of the Kung Bushman population had red cell ADA deficiency not associated with immunodeficiency. The authors concluded that the phenotype was due to a polymorphic allele, designated ADA-8, with a frequency of approximately 0.11 in the Kung population. |Hart et al. (1986) reported a second Bantu-speaking Xhosa man from South Africa with partial ADA deficiency similar to the type previously reported by Jenkins et al. (1976). Erythrocyte ADA levels were decreased at 6 to 9% of normal, whereas white cell ADA was approximately 30% of normal, and the enzyme showed decreased stability in vitro. Levels of dATP were 2- to 3-fold above normal in red blood cells. Electrophoretic studies suggested compound heterozygosity. |Hirschhorn et al. (1979) reported a patient with ADA deficiency without immunodeficiency in whom the mutant ADA enzyme was unstable. Daddona et al. (1983) reported another patient with partial ADA deficiency and normal immune function. ADA activity and protein were undetectable in red blood cells, 0.9% of normal in lymphocytes, 4% in lymphoblasts, and 14% in fibroblasts. The ADA protein was abnormally acidic. |Hirschhorn et al. (1983) reported 4 unrelated children with partial ADA deficiency who lacked ADA in their erythrocytes but retained variable amounts of activity in their lymphoid cells. None had significant immunologic deficiency. Electrophoretic mobility studies showed different forms of the enzyme: one form was acidic, had very low activity, and was heat-stable; a second was basic, had low activity, and was heat-labile; a third was heat-labile and retained relatively normal activity; and a fourth had decreased activity without qualitative abnormalities. Hirschhorn et al. (1983) concluded that 3 of the individuals had mutations at the structural locus for ADA, and that the fourth may have had a mutation at a regulatory locus. Noting that 2 of the partially deficient families were of African descent and a third came from the Mediterranean basin, Hirschhorn et al. (1983) suggested that partial ADA deficiency may confer an advantage against intraerythrocytic parasites, such as malaria or babesiosis, which require exogenous purines derived from the host to survive. |Hirschhorn and Ellenbogen (1986) reported 5 unrelated patients with partial ADA deficiency identified through a New York state neonatal screening program. None of them had immunologic abnormalities. Three patients were shown to be genetic compounds by the presence of 2 electrophoretically distinguishable allozymes or by family studies that demonstrated a null allele in addition to an electrophoretically abnormal enzyme. All 5 of the children were either black or of West Indian descent, suggesting a clustering of the partial ADA deficiency phenotype in this ethnic group. The genetically distinct enzymes excluded a founder effect, and the authors again concluded a selective advantage for partial ADA deficiency. |Hershfield (2003) stated that red cell dATP (dAXP) is elevated by zero to approximately 30-fold in patients with partial ADA deficiency.|
614300::hypermethioninemia due to adenosine kinase deficiency is caused by homozygous mutation in the ADK gene (102750) on chromosome 10q22.|Hypermethioninemia due to adenosine kinase deficiency is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism characterized by global developmental delay, early-onset seizures, mild dysmorphic features, and characteristic biochemical anomalies, including persistent hypermethioninemia with increased levels of S-adenosylmethionine (AdoMet) and S-adenosylhomocysteine (AdoHcy); homocysteine is typically normal (summary by Bjursell et al., 2011). |Bjursell et al. (2011) reported 2 Swedish sibs with severe developmental delay, mild liver dysfunction, and hypermethioninemia. Both had failure to thrive in the neonatal period and later showed hypotonia, profound psychomotor delay, and liver dysfunction. Both developed seizures before age 3 years. Dysmorphic features included macrocephaly, frontal bossing, hypertelorism, and slender hands and feet. During childhood, both had sparse or absent language and slowly progressive muscular weakness and wasting. EEG showed slow background activity with diffuse multifocal discharges in some instances and abundant spike slow-wave complexes of high amplitude at other times. The girl died during sleep at 10 years of age. Liver biopsy performed at age 10 months in the boy showed slight portal fibrosis and steatosis, and brain MRI showed cerebral atrophy with nonspecific white matter degeneration. Brain MRI was essentially normal at 14 months in the girl. Laboratory studies showed persistent isolated hypermethioninemia, increased levels of S-adenosylmethionine and S-adenosylhomocysteine, and normal or mildly increased total homocysteine. Urinary studies showed increased excretion of adenosine. S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase deficiency (613752) was excluded. |Bjursell et al. (2011) also reported 4 Malaysian patients from 2 unrelated consanguineous families with a similar disorder. All had severe developmental delay and epilepsy, and all but 1 had macrocephaly with frontal bossing. Liver biopsy of 3 patients showed cholestasis. Three individuals had cardiac defects: 1 had mild pulmonary stenosis and a small secundum atrial septal defect, another had a small secundum atrial septal defect, and a third had a mild coarctation of the aorta. Two patients had mild to moderate sensorineural hearing loss. |
103050::adenylosuccinase deficiency (ADLSD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ADSL gene (608222) on chromosome 22q13.|Adenylosuccinase deficiency is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism caused by an enzymatic defect in de novo purine synthesis (DNPS) pathway. ADSL deficiency leads to the accumulation of toxic intermediates, including succinyladenosine (S-Ado) and succinylaminoimidazole carboxamide riboside (SAICAr) in body fluids. There are 3 major phenotypic forms of the disorder that correlate with different values of the S-Ado and SAICAr concentration ratios (S-Ado/SAICAr) in the cerebrospinal fluid. These include the most severe fatal neonatal encephalopathy (S-Ado/SAICAr ratio less than 1); childhood form (type I) with severe psychomotor retardation (S-Ado/SAICAr ratio close to 1), and a milder form (type II) with psychomotor retardation or hypotonia (S-Ado/SAICAr ratio greater than 2) (summary by Baresova et al., 2012). |In 3 children with severe psychomotor delay and autism, Jaeken and Van den Berghe (1984) found succinyladenosine (S-Ado) and succinylaminoimidazole carboxamide (SAICA) ribotide in the body fluids. Concentrations of both compounds were about 100 micromol/l in CSF, between 5 and 10 micromol/l in plasma, and in the millimol/l range in urine. Normally these compounds are not found in blood and CSF but may be detected in trace amounts in urine. The authors noted that the compounds are dephosphorylated derivatives of the intracellular metabolites adenylosuccinate and succinylaminoimidazole carboxamide ribotide, the 2 substrates of adenylosuccinase (adenylosuccinate lyase). Assays of the enzyme in 1 patient showed marked reduction of activity in liver and absence of activity in the kidney. Two of the 3 affected children were brother and sister, offspring of related Moroccan parents. The authors suggested that adenylosuccinase deficiency is a specific autosomal recessive cause of autism. |Jaeken et al. (1988) presented clinical and biochemical data on 8 children with adenylosuccinase deficiency. Seven of the 8 children showed severe psychomotor retardation. Epilepsy was documented in 5, autistic features in 3, and growth retardation associated with muscular wasting in a brother and sister. One female patient was strikingly less retarded mentally and had only mild psychomotor retardation. In this patient, the ratio of the 2 metabolites in body fluids was quite different from that in the severely retarded patients, showing an approximately 5-fold excess of succinyladenosine. In addition, adenylosuccinase activity in fibroblasts was only about 6% of normal, whereas it was about 40% of normal in 6 severely retarded patients. At least 2 of the patients from separate families were the offspring of consanguineous parents. |Jaeken et al. (1992) described a patient with an intermediate phenotypic severity resulting from adenylosuccinase deficiency. Chemical findings in the patient supported the impression that there is an inverse relationship between the degree of clinical involvement and the excess of succinyladenosine over SAICA riboside. Jaeken et al. (1992) concluded that SAICA riboside may be the offending compound that interferes with neurofunction and that succinyladenosine may protect against its effects. |In Prague, Sebesta et al. (1997) screened urine samples from more than 2,000 children with unexplained neurologic disease. Using thin-layer chromatography, they identified 2 boys and 3 girls in 4 kindreds with adenylosuccinase deficiency. Two of the 4 kindreds were of Gypsy origin. Two boys were diagnosed at ages 2 and 5 years, and 3 girls were diagnosed at ages 9 months, 3 years, and 6 years. The onset of the disease ranged from the fourteenth day to 6 months. Two sibs exhibited a less severe clinical picture and identical clinical course. They came to attention in the first year of life when psychomotor retardation developed. Neurologic examination showed hypotonia and hyperactivity. All 3 of the other patients exhibited severe psychomotor retardation in early infancy.|Whereas most cases of adenylosuccinase deficiency had been detected by metabolic screening for severe psychomotor retardation, Maaswinkel-Mooij et al. (1997) described an infant who manifested generalized seizures as a first symptom of the disorder. She was initially diagnosed with West syndrome (308350). The first admission was at 9 weeks of age. The patient was treated with phenobarbital and remained seizure-free for 10 months. At the age of 15 months, she was reinvestigated because of a cluster of tonic seizures, and electroencephalogram showed hypsarrhythmia. Psychomotor retardation became apparent in the second year of life. |Holder-Espinasse et al. (2002) reported 2 patients with adenylosuccinase deficiency who had similar mild facial dysmorphic features, including brachycephaly, prominent metopic sutures, a small nose with anteverted nostrils, long and smooth philtrum, thin upper lip, and low-set ears. The authors noted that a patient previously reported by Nassogne et al. (2000) had similar features. |Edery et al. (2003) observed an unusually variable combination of clinical features and striking intrafamilial variability in the phenotype. Among 3 sibs from a family originally from Portugal, the proband had marked psychomotor regression and progressive cerebellar vermis atrophy; the other 2 affected sibs presented mainly autistic features. The sibs were homozygous for the R426H mutation (608222.0002). The authors suggested that adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency should be considered and assessed using a simple urinary screening method for the presence of succinylpurines in all patients with mental retardation of unexplained origin. |Gitiaux et al. (2009) reported 2 sisters, aged 11 and 12 years, with genetically confirmed adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency (608222.0008). The girls presented with global developmental delay, motor apraxia, severe speech deficits, and seizures. They also had unusual behavioral features, including excessive laughter, very happy disposition, hyperactivity, short attention span, mouthing of objects, tantrums, and stereotyped movements, which were reminiscent of Angelman syndrome (AS; 105830). Both had had an increased succinyladenosine/SAICAr ratio of 1.6. |
201810::congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 2 deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the HSD3B2 gene (613890) on chromosome 1p12.|Classic 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency is an autosomal recessive form of CAH characterized by a severe impairment of steroid biosynthesis in both the adrenals and the gonads, resulting in decreased excretion of cortisol and aldosterone and of progesterone, androgens, and estrogens by these tissues. Affected newborns exhibit signs and symptoms of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid deficiencies, which may be fatal if not diagnosed and treated early, especially in the severe salt-wasting form. Moreover, male newborns exhibit pseudohermaphroditism with incomplete masculinization of the external genitalia due to an impairment of androgen biosynthesis in the testis. In contrast, affected females exhibit normal sexual differentiation or partial virilization (summary by Rheaume et al., 1992). |Virilization is much less marked or does not occur in this type, suggesting that the gene-determined defect involves the testis as well as the adrenal. Males with the defect have hypospadias. Indeed, this form of adrenal hyperplasia can cause male pseudohermaphroditism. Salt loss is a frequent cause of death. Death may occur even with adequate adrenal replacement therapy, perhaps because of the enzyme deficiency in other organs. Zachmann et al. (1979) concluded that estrogen replacement (at a bone age of about 12 years) is required because of the involvement of the ovaries as well as the adrenal. This disorder was first reported by Bongiovanni in the early 1960s (see Bongiovanni, 1962).|Cravioto et al. (1986) referred to the enzyme deficient in these cases as 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-isomerase. They described a brother and sister with an unusual form of 3-beta-HSD deficiency. The brother, aged 19 years, had a history of repeated episodes of acute adrenal crisis. The affected sister was 6 years old. A brother born between them had died of acute adrenal crisis. The findings concerning steroid levels at rest and after ACTH or hCG stimulation, coupled with normal phenotypic development and onset of puberty in the 2 patients, indicated intact C-19 steroid 3-beta-HSD activity. |Mendonca et al. (1987) described 2 adult cousins with male pseudohermaphroditism due to 3-beta-HSD deficiency without clinical salt-losing. Both patients had been reared as females since birth. One patient presented at age 17 with perineal hypospadias, virilization without gynecomastia, and a female-to-male gender role change at puberty. The second patient had undergone bilateral orchidectomy in childhood and presented 'primary amenorrhea,' absence of virilization, and a female gender role at the age of 24. Nishi and Tezuka (1992) studied 7 girls and 1 boy, of whom 3 were sibs, with accelerated growth and premature pubarche and/or hirsutism between the ages of 7 and 9.5 years. They concluded that the children had a mild form of 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency. |To test their hypothesis that the hormonal phenotype of HSDB3 deficiency in hyperandrogenic females is related to insulin-resistant polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS; see 184700), Carbunaru et al. (2004) compared insulin sensitivity and gonadotropin secretion in 6 hyperandrogenic females with compromised adrenal HSDB3 phenotype despite normal HSDB3 genes to those in 9 hyperandrogenic females with classic PCOS of similar ages (14 to 36 years). The same was examined in girls with premature pubarche, 4 with and 5 without the compromised HSDB3 phenotype. The authors found that insulin sensitivity and gonadotropin data in both hyperandrogenic females with the compromised HSDB3 phenotype and classic PCOS indicated significant insulin resistance and LH (see 152780) hypersecretion in both. They concluded that the compromised HSDB3 phenotype in hyperandrogenic females is associated with a variant of insulin-resistant PCOS. |
300200::X-linked congenital adrenal hypoplasia with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is caused by mutation in the NR0B1 gene (300473).|Congenital adrenal hypoplasia (AHC) is a rare disorder that can be inherited in an X-linked or autosomal recessive (see 240200) pattern. In X-linked AHC, primary adrenocortical failure occurs because the adrenal glands lack the permanent adult cortical zone. The remaining cells are termed 'cytomegalic' because they are larger than typical fetal adrenal cells (Hay et al., 1981; Reutens et al., 1999). |Patients with AHC usually present in early infancy with primary adrenal failure. Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HHG) is a hallmark of the disorder, and is recognized during adolescence because of the absence or interruption of normal pubertal development. Abnormal spermatogenesis has also been observed in these patients. Milder forms of the disease have been described, with adrenal insufficiency sometimes occurring in childhood or even early adulthood. A few cases of partial HHG have been reported (summary by Raffin-Sanson et al., 2013). Transient precocious sexual development in infancy or early childhood can be a prominent feature of AHC (Landau et al., 2010).|A contiguous gene syndrome involving a combination of congenital adrenal hypoplasia, glycerol kinase deficiency (307030), and Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD; 310200) is caused by deletion of multiple genes on chromosome Xp21 (see 300679).|Weiss and Mellinger (1970) described an X-linked form of congenital adrenal hypoplasia in 3 of 4 brothers, each of whom had a different father. Histologically, there was hypoplasia of the adrenal cortex and lack of organization of the cortex into cords, as well as clumps of large pale-staining cells. Several other families consistent with X-linked inheritance had been reported (e.g., Boyd and MacDonald, 1960; Uttley, 1968; Stempfel and Engel, 1960). Brochner-Mortensen (1956) described Addison disease in 2 brothers and 2 of their maternal uncles. Three of the patients had died at ages 19, 26, and 33 years. In brothers reported by Meakin et al. (1959), the diagnosis was made in the elder at 9 years of age and in the second at 6 years of age. |Congenital adrenal hypoplasia with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HHG) was observed by Hay (1977), who suggested that hypogonadism might be a consequence of absence of adrenal androgen secretion. Hay et al. (1981) described 5 boys with cytomegalic adrenocortical hypoplasia who had been followed for many years. Despite treatment with replacement corticosteroids, all 5 failed to show a spontaneous onset of puberty, and when assessed at ages 13 to 19 years, all had both sexual infantilism and skeletal immaturity. Hypogonadism was confirmed by low levels of plasma testosterone and inadequate pituitary reserve of gonadotropin. Treatment with either testosterone or gonadotropin resulted in advances in pubertal staging in all 5 patients. |Hay et al. (1981) noted that the association of hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism with familial cytomegalic adrenocortical hypoplasia is a common finding. Prader et al. (1975), Golden et al. (1977), and Zachmann et al. (1980) also described this association. Martin (1971) described a pair of brothers in whom the signs of Addison disease developed at age 5. Gonadotropin deficiency was later demonstrated in both brothers (Martin, 1980). |An extensive Greenlandic pedigree was reported by Petersen et al. (1982). Over 5 generations, 11 boys had died with a clinical picture of adrenocortical insufficiency within 3 weeks of birth. In 3 treated males who survived, the adrenal glands could not be identified by computed tomography. Pubertal development was delayed in 2 patients aged 14 years. Subsequently, Schwartz et al. (1997) identified a missense mutation (300473.0008) in the DAX1 gene in 3 affected members of this Greenlandic family. |Reutens et al. (1999) described the clinical features and genetic alterations in 6 families with AHC. Most patients presented within the first year of life with variable signs and symptoms, including hyperpigmentation, salt-wasting crisis, vomiting, and malaise. One patient had a delayed presentation at the age of 7 years, after a hypotensive episode and hyponatremia during an acute asthma attack. A review of the literature showed an apparent bimodal distribution for age at diagnosis. The majority of patients were diagnosed within the first 2 months of life, and another group of patients were diagnosed from 1 to 11 years. Nonsense mutations in the DAX1 gene were identified in 3 cases, and frameshift mutations resulting in a premature stop codon were found in the other 3 families. There were no obvious genotype/phenotype correlations. The authors concluded that the clinical presentation of DAX1 mutations is variable and emphasized the value of genetic testing in boys with primary adrenal insufficiency and suspected X-linked AHC. |The review of Kletter et al. (1991) suggested that gonadotropin deficiency is an integral part of X-linked cytomegalic adrenocortical hypoplasia.|Zachmann et al. (1992) found progressive high frequency hearing loss developing at about the age of 14 years in 3 brothers with X-linked congenital adrenal hypoplasia associated with gonadotropin deficiency. All 3, aged 22, 20, and 18 years, had developed progressive high frequency hearing loss at about 14 years of age. They were doing well on replacement therapy with hydrocortisone, fluorohydrocortisone, and long-acting testosterone. High resolution chromosomal analysis showed no structural anomalies. Although no statement was made concerning the sense of smell, the gonadotropin deficiency may have represented Kallmann syndrome (308700). |Jones et al. (1995) reported the case of a Hispanic boy with congenital adrenal hypoplasia who had coal-black hyperpigmentation at birth. Both parents were of light complexion. Usually hyperpigmentation in this condition appears gradually over a period of months to years. Following steroid therapy, the patient's color began to lighten, and at week 7 of life the infant had pigmentation intermediate between coal-black and the color of his Hispanic mother. By 6 months of age, the infant's skin color was similar to that of his mother. |Tabarin et al. (2000) reported an unusually mild case in a man who presented with apparently isolated adrenal insufficiency at 28 years of age. Examination revealed partial pubertal development (Tanner stage 3) and undiagnosed incomplete HHG. The patient noted that puberty had occurred at about age 16, and that he had impaired libido and infrequent erections. Severe oligospermia was detected. A mutation in the DAX1 gene (300473.0020) was found, extending the clinical spectrum of the disease to include a milder disorder with delayed onset of symptoms. |Domenice et al. (2001) reported a 2-year-old Brazilian boy with a DAX1 mutation (300473.0024). Initial clinical manifestation was isosexual gonadotropin-independent precocious puberty. He presented with pubic hair, enlarged penis and testes, and advanced bone age. Testosterone levels were elevated, whereas basal and GnRH-stimulated LH levels were compatible with a prepubertal pattern. Chronic GnRH agonist therapy did not reduce testosterone levels, supporting the diagnosis of gonadotropin-independent precocious puberty. Surprisingly, steroid replacement therapy induced a clear decrease in testicular size and testosterone levels to the prepubertal range. The authors concluded that chronic excessive ACTH levels resulting from adrenal insufficiency may stimulate Leydig cells and lead to gonadotropin-independent precocious puberty in some boys with DAX1 gene mutations. |Salvi et al. (2002) reported a 25-year-old man with a complex rearrangement in the DAX1 gene (300473.0026) who was diagnosed with adrenal failure at 6 weeks of age, but who experienced transient recovery of adrenal function of several months' duration later in infancy. He subsequently failed to undergo puberty because of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HHG) that was demonstrated to be of pituitary origin, with no pituitary gonadotropin secretion upon stimulation by low-dose pulsatile GnRH or by acute administration of GnRH by intravenous bolus. The patient was also diagnosed with schizophrenia in early adulthood. Salvi et al. (2002) noted that heterogeneity both in age at diagnosis and in severity of the adrenal syndrome is a well-recognized feature of AHC, and that variability in the HHG syndrome that classically accompanies AHC has also been reported. They stated that there was evidence in the literature supporting a purely hypothalamic origin of the defect, a pituitary origin, or both, and noted that the results obtained in their patient did not exclude a hypothalamic component to the HHG. |Landau et al. (2010) studied 12 patients with AHC from 5 Israeli families. Six patients from 2 families had a contiguous gene deletion involving NR0B1, and those patients also exhibited developmental delay ranging from mild to severe. The remaining 6 patients had point mutations, resulting in a nonsense mutation, a missense mutation, and a splice site mutation, respectively. Signs of transient precocious sexual development were documented in infancy and childhood in 5 patients from 4 families, with enlarged penis in all 5 patients and increased testicular volume in 2 brothers. All 5 patients later exhibited HHG at the age of puberty. Landau et al. (2010) noted that the clinical spectrum of disease in X-linked AHC is quite variable, and that precocious sexual development can be a prominent feature. |Raffin-Sanson et al. (2013) studied a family in which 3 male relatives were hemizygous for a nonsense mutation in the NR0B1 gene (W39X; see MOLECULAR GENETICS), with different adrenal consequences. The proband, 47 years old at the time of the report, had been diagnosed at age 19 years with adrenal insufficiency and with oligospermia at age 23. Evaluation at 32 years of age showed normal external genitalia, and he reported spontaneous onset of puberty at age 13, with normal virilization, growth spurt, and testicular growth. CT scan showed bilateral adrenal atrophy. Over 25 years of follow-up, his LH pulsatile secretion and testosterone level remained normal, consistent with LH-driven preservation of Leydig cell function. However, his sperm counts fell from 4 x 10(6) at age 23 to 0.05 x 10(6) by age 37, and inhibin B (see 147290) levels also decreased, indicating impaired Sertoli cell function. He fathered 1 child by in vitro fertilization at age 33 and another by spontaneous conception 2 years later. Evaluation of the proband's younger brother at age 36 years revealed complete virilization with normal penile length and testicular volume, but low testosterone level and azoospermia. He also exhibited an abnormal cortisol response to the standard-dose cortrosyn test and was diagnosed with mild asymptomatic adrenal insufficiency. In addition, their sister gave birth to a boy who underwent adrenal crisis during the second week of life. All 3 patients carried the recurrent W39X mutation, which Raffin-Sanson et al. (2013) stated had previously been reported in patients with mild phenotypes. |
613743::this phenotype is caused by heterozygous, compound heterozygous, or homozygous mutation in the CYP11A1 gene (118485) on chromosome 15q23-q24, encoding cytochrome P450 cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc).|P450scc deficiency is a rare disorder that can present as acute adrenal insufficiency in infancy or childhood. ACTH and plasma renin activity are grossly elevated and adrenal steroids are inappropriately low or absent; the 46,XY patients have female external genitalia, sometimes with clitoromegaly. The phenotypic spectrum ranges from prematurity, complete underandrogenization, and severe early-onset adrenal failure to term birth with clitoromegaly and later-onset adrenal failure (summary by Kim et al., 2008). Although hormonal and phenotypic features can resemble those of congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia (lipoid CAH; 201710), no patient with P450scc deficiency has been described with the massive adrenal enlargement typical of lipoid CAH (summary by Sahakitrungruang et al., 2011). |In studying patients with clinical features of lipoid CAH, Tajima et al. (2001) encountered an individual with a heterozygous mutation in P450scc. The patient presented at 4 years of age with lethargy and hyperpigmentation. Serum sodium and potassium were both normal, but ACTH was extremely elevated, plasma aldosterone was elevated, and cortisol was low. The karyotype was 46,XY; the patient had clitoromegaly, no labial fusion, and separate vaginal and urethral openings. Computed tomographic and ultrasonographic examinations revealed no hypertrophy of the adrenal glands, and no uterus. Inguinal hernias had been diagnosed at 2 years of age, and inguinal masses had been resected at another clinic; Tajima et al. (2001) remarked that these were probably testes. Vaginography demonstrated a blind vaginal pouch. The patient was treated with hydrocortisone and 9-alpha-fluorocortisone; she became more active and the hyperpigmentation disappeared. Tajima et al. (2001) noted that the slower, more insidious onset of adrenal insufficiency and absence of enlarged adrenals were atypical of lipoid CAH. |Katsumata et al. (2002) reported a child with congenital adrenal insufficiency who at the age of 7 months presented with hyperpigmentation and markedly elevated ACTH levels. At the age of 9 months, endocrinologic investigation revealed increased levels of ACTH and inappropriately normal levels of cortisol, aldosterone (high normal), and 17-alpha-hydroxyprogesterone. Electrolyte and plasma glucose levels were normal. The karyotype was 46,XX. Serum FSH (136530) approached the upper limit of normal, suggesting to Katsumata et al. (2002) the possibility of early ovarian insufficiency. The patient was successfully treated with hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone. |Hiort et al. (2005) described a patient who presented with severe adrenal insufficiency in the first days of life. The child was born at 31 weeks' gestation. The karyotype was 46,XY; the baby's phenotype was unequivocally female with an unusual bronze skin color. Severe salt wasting was present in the neonatal period. Plasma ACTH and renin activity were extremely elevated. Plasma cortisol and 17-hydroxyprogesterone were undetectable. The child developed respiratory failure and was put on a respiratory ventilator. Treatment with hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone produced rapid improvement. Urinary steroid analysis at the age of 2 months did not demonstrate any excretion of 3-beta-hydroxy-5-ene steroids, suggesting complete loss of steroidogenesis. Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging failed to demonstrate gonads or adrenal tissue, and no uterus was seen.|Al Kandari et al. (2006) reported a 46,XY phenotypic female who presented with life-threatening adrenal insufficiency at the age of 1 year 9 months. Generalized tanning of skin was present with markedly increased pigmentation of lips and gums, nape of neck, and abdomen. ACTH and plasma renin activity were extremely elevated, with very low or undetectable aldosterone. Treatment with hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone produced dramatic improvement. External genitalia were those of a normal female. Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging identified bilateral small gonads in inguinal regions, and adrenal glands of normal size. Genitogram showed short, blunt-ended vagina. Computed tomography revealed complete agenesis of the corpus callosum. Developmental milestones had been normal to this time. |Kim et al. (2008) reviewed the findings in all patients reported to that time with P450scc deficiency, including the patients described by Tajima et al. (2001), Katsumata et al. (2002), Hiort et al. (2005), and Al Kandari et al. (2006), as well as 2 new patients. They noted that the phenotypic spectrum ranged from prematurity, complete underandrogenization, and severe early-onset adrenal failure resulting from severe loss-of-function mutations (Hiort et al., 2005) to term birth with clitoromegaly and later-onset adrenal failure resulting from partial deficiency (Tajima et al., 2001). In all cases ACTH and plasma renin activity were grossly elevated and adrenal steroids were inappropriately low or absent. In contradistinction to the massive adrenal enlargement typically seen in lipoid CAH, caused by mutation in StAR (600617), none of the 6 patients with P450scc deficiency had been reported to have adrenal hyperplasia. |Rubtsov et al. (2009) described a patient with P450scc deficiency who showed no overt signs of adrenal insufficiency until the age of 9 years, when he began to experience episodes of weakness, dizziness, and vomiting. At birth he presented with bilateral cryptorchidism with inguinal testes, midshaft hypospadias, and bilateral talipes equinovarus. Karyotype was 46,XY. Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging showed normal-sized adrenals. The patient's twin, a phenotypic female, had died at age 2.5 years after an unknown illness presenting with weakness and cyanosis. |Sahakitrungruang et al. (2011) described 2 sibs with hormonal findings suggesting nonclassic lipoid CAH who had mutations in P450scc that retained partial function. A 46,XY male presented with underdeveloped genitalia and partial adrenal insufficiency; his 46,XX sister presented with adrenal insufficiency. Both sibs had small adrenals with calcifications. |Sahakitrungruang et al. (2011) noted that most cases of P450scc deficiency reported to that time had presented with the hormonal and phenotypic features of classic lipoid CAH, although none had been described with the massive adrenal enlargement typical of lipoid CAH. Patients with the 'classic' forms of both P450scc deficiency and lipoid CAH typically present with adrenal failure and salt wasting in infancy and are phenotypically female irrespective of genetic sex. The nonclassic forms of the disorders present with varying degrees of retained adrenal function and sexual development. |
300100::adrenoleukodystrophy and adrenomyeloneuropathy are caused by mutation in the ABCD1 gene (300371) on chromosome Xq21.|Adrenoleukodystrophy is an X-linked disorder which is secondary to a mutation in the ABCD1 gene and results in the apparent defect in peroxisomal beta oxidation and the accumulation of the saturated very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA) in all tissues of the body. The manifestations of the disorder occur primarily in the adrenal cortex, the myelin of the central nervous system, and the Leydig cells of the testes.|ABCD1 is an ATPase binding cassette protein in the same category of transporter proteins such as the CFTR and MDR proteins.|Identification of X-ALD as a lipid-storage disease, as a defect in the capacity to degrade VLCFAs, and its characterization as a peroxisomal disorder was reviewed by Moser (1997). Moser et al. (2005) provided a clinical review of ALD. |Adrenoleukodystrophy can present at a variety of ages and with different manifestations depending on the presence and type of neurologic findings. Moser et al. (2000) stated that there are 7 phenotypes, which include the childhood cerebral form, adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN), adult cerebral, adolescent, adrenal insufficiency without neurologic disease, asymptomatic, and heterozygotes. |The clinical presentation can vary within the same family. One male may have the childhood form of the disorder and his brother may have the adult form. It is apparent that neither the genetic mutation nor the level of biochemical abnormality predicts the phenotypic presentation.|Davis et al. (1979) observed a family with 4 cases of adrenoleukodystrophy and 1 of adrenomyeloneuropathy, suggesting the fundamental identity of the 2 disorders. The patient with adrenomyeloneuropathy was well until age 21 years when he developed spastic paraparesis. He subsequently fathered 2 daughters and a stillborn child. He was 41 years old at the time of study and showed no clinical manifestations of adrenal insufficiency. A brother of his developed paraparesis at age 13 and progressed to death at age 19. A nephew became ill at age 4 and died at age 7. Autopsy showed atrophic adrenals although no clinical signs of adrenal insufficiency were observed. |O'Neill et al. (1982) studied a kindred in which 14 members were affected with a variable combination of neurologic and adrenal manifestations. Abnormality was identified by increased content of C(26:0) fatty acid (hexacosanoic acid) in cultured skin fibroblasts and abnormal C26/C22 fatty acid ratios. The latter ratios were not proportional to severity of disease, duration, or character of the neurologic syndrome. In the family reported by O'Neill et al. (1980, 1982), clinically apparent Addison disease without neurologic involvement was the expression of adrenoleukodystrophy in males, and spastic paraplegia and sphincter disturbances occurred in female carriers. |Sobue et al. (1994) described considerable phenotypic heterogeneity between 2 proven monozygotic twins, both of whom had myeloneuropathy. Extensive demyelination in the brain was only prominent in the older twin, while adrenal insufficiency was prominent in the younger twin. They suggested that nongenetic factors were important determinants of the phenotypic variation of the adrenoleukodystrophy gene. Korenke et al. (1996) and Di Rocco et al. (2001) also reported pairs of identical male twins with different clinical expressions of ALD. Wilichowski et al. (1998) found no difference in mitochondrial DNA in the twins reported by Korenke et al. (1996). Di Rocco et al. (2001) stated that the discordant adrenoleukodystrophy phenotypes in 3 pairs of monozygotic twins indicated that modifier genes were not involved in determining the occurrence of CNS degeneration. They suggested that identifying environmental factors could be important for effectively preventing CNS degeneration in this disorder. |By neuropsychologic testing, Cox et al. (2006) found normal cognitive function in 48 of 52 neurologically asymptomatic boys with ALD (mean age, 6.7 years). All of the patients had normal brain MRI studies. However, there was a negative correlation between age and visual perception as well as age and visuomotor skills. Cox et al. (2006) concluded that a subset of patients with the childhood form of ALD have normal neurodevelopment despite an inherent defect in the ABCD1 gene. |The classic presentation of childhood cerebral ALD has been analyzed in several large series (Schaumburg et al., 1975; Aubourg et al., 1982). This is the form of the illness that was originally described by Siemerling and Creutzfeldt (1923) and, until it was possible to make the biochemical diagnosis, it was the only form of the disease recognized as adrenoleukodystrophy. It is a rapidly progressive demyelinating condition affecting the cerebral white matter. It is by definition confined to boys who develop cerebral involvement before the age of 10 years. The boys are normal at birth and have unremarkable development. The mean age of onset is approximately 7 years. |The disease usually manifests itself early with behavioral manifestations including inattention, hyperactivity, and emotional lability. It often becomes apparent through school difficulties. It progresses into visual symptoms, auditory processing difficulties, and motor incoordination. Once the neurologic manifestations appear, progression of the illness is tragically rapid and the child is often in a vegetative state within 1 to 2 years.|Magnetic resonance imaging is often the first diagnostic study and shows a characteristic pattern of symmetric involvement of the posterior parietooccipital white matter in 85% of patients, frontal involvement in 10%, and an asymmetric pattern in the rest.|Budka et al. (1976) reported a case they interpreted as an adult variant of adrenoleukodystrophy. At the time, a geneticist could raise the possibility of this form being the consequence of an allelic mutation, but phenotypic variability within families has subsequently been demonstrated. The neurologic picture was dominated by spastic paraplegia. Both clinically and pathologically, absence of diffuse cerebral involvement was noteworthy. The endocrinologic disorder was the particularly striking feature. |Griffin et al. (1977) and Schaumburg et al. (1977) described a variant that they called adrenomyeloneuropathy. Hypogonadism was present in all cases appropriately studied. Adrenal insufficiency began in childhood and progressive spastic paraparesis in the third decade. Neurologic features included peripheral neuropathy, impotence, and sphincter disturbances. |O'Neill et al. (1985) found biochemical characteristics of ALD in 2 brothers with spastic paraplegia of onset at age 40 and 50 years. Further study in the family revealed 2 nephews who were also affected as well as asymptomatic carriers in a typical X-linked pedigree pattern. None had symptoms of adrenal insufficiency. Cotrufo et al. (1987) reported the remarkable cases of an uncle and nephew who were completely asymptomatic at ages 25 and 10, respectively, but who showed levels of very long chain fatty acids in plasma consistent with the ALD hemizygote state. Both were found to have adrenocortical insufficiency as evidenced by compensatory high ACTH release. |Uyama et al. (1993) described a man who had presenile onset (at age 51 years) of the cerebral form of ALD. The first manifestation was difficulty in recalling where he had placed things. Shortly thereafter, he had problems operating farm machinery and gradually developed difficulty seeing clearly and writing at normal speeds. He could dress himself but often put garments on backward or inside out. He later developed Balint syndrome and dementia. (Balint syndrome is an acquired visuospatial disorder characterized by psychic paralysis of visual fixation, optic ataxia, and disturbance of visual attention with relatively intact vision (Hecaen and De Ajuriaguerra, 1954).) MRI demonstrated demyelinating lesions in the bilateral posterior parietooccipital white matter involving the splenium of the corpus callosum. The patient could not move his eyes on command or follow a moving object. He had difficulty in maintaining central fixation. Optic ataxia was also shown by frequent errors when he attempted to grasp an object at which he was looking. The patient was bedridden by age 54 and died at age 55. Tests of adrenal function yielded normal results. Ratios of C26:0 to C22:0 in plasma and in erythrocyte membranes established the diagnosis of ALD in the proband and demonstrated that his mother was a heterozygote. |Van Geel et al. (2001) studied the evolution of the disease in adults. They studied 129 men retrospectively, with a mean follow-up period of 10.1 +/- 5.0 years. Among 32 neurologically asymptomatic patients, 16 (50%) developed some neurologic involvement. Among 68 men with AMN without cerebral involvement, 13 (19%) developed clinically apparent cerebral demyelination. There was a high risk for adult neurologically asymptomatic patients to develop neurologic deficits and for AMN patients to develop cerebral demyelination. This had implications for the phenotype classification, search for modifying factors, and the development and evaluation of new therapies. |Eichler et al. (2007) reviewed serial brain MRI scans of 56 adult patients with ALD and white matter abnormalities. Forty-two (75%) of these patients had corticospinal tract involvement, and 21 (50%) of the 42 showed lesion progression over a 3 to 5-year period. Disease progression was slower in adults compared to that previously observed in affected children. Only 3 adult patients showed isolated lesions in the genu or the splenium, all of which developed in childhood or adolescence. The findings suggested that progressive inflammatory demyelination can occur along with the known axonopathy of adulthood. Eichler et al. (2007) suggested that the vulnerability of specific fiber tracts in ALD changes with age. |Addison disease in young males should prompt consideration of ALD as the underlying abnormality. See also Sadeghi-Nejad and Senior (1990). Laureti et al. (1996) performed biochemical analysis of very long chain fatty acids in 14 male patients (age ranging from 12-45 years at diagnosis) previously diagnosed as having primary idiopathic adrenocortical insufficiency. In 5 of the 14 patients, elevated levels of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA) were found in plasma; none had adrenocortical antibodies. By electrophysiologic tests and magnetic resonance imaging, it was determined that 2 had cerebral ALD, 1 had adrenomyeloneuropathy with cerebral involvement, and 2 had preclinical AMN. |Since the adrenal insufficiency may long precede neurologic manifestations and perhaps may occur alone, caution must be exercised in the interpretation of isolated X-linked Addison disease as a separate entity. Of course, autopsy-confirmed adrenal hypoplasia (300200) is a well-established entity.|The achalasia-Addisonian syndrome (231550), which appears to be autosomal recessive, is another example of combined adrenal and neurologic (autonomic) involvement.|The postperfusion syndrome is an uncommon event following open-heart surgery with extracorporeal circulation. It is associated with a young age at surgery (less than 1 year) and bypass lasting longer than 60 minutes. Luciani et al. (1997) observed the syndrome in an 18-year-old man who underwent transpulmonary patch repair of a ventricular septal defect with cardiopulmonary bypass for 50 minutes. Preoperatively, the patient exhibited a slight gait disorder and unremarkable EEG and laboratory findings. Twelve hours after surgery he developed hypotension and circulatory collapse. This was treated successfully, but 10 days after discharge the patient was admitted with findings suggesting Addison disease. He showed a worsening disturbance of gait, with ataxia and EEG abnormalities. The diagnosis of adrenoleukodystrophy was supported by MRI of the head and confirmed by increased plasma levels of very long chain saturated fatty acids. Thus, Luciani et al. (1997) concluded that this was a case of Addisonian crisis precipitated by surgery in a patient with previously unrecognized ALD. |Women who are carriers for the condition may develop spastic paraparesis with bowel and bladder difficulties. This appears to be partially a function of age.|Heffungs et al. (1980) observed cerebral sclerosis and Addison disease in a previously healthy 14-year-old sister of an affected boy. They suggested that this was the first documented example of adrenoleukodystrophy in a heterozygote. Several other unusual examples have been published. |Also see O'Neill et al. (1982). The patient reported by Noetzel et al. (1987) illustrates further the occurrence of a chronic nonprogressive spinal cord syndrome in women heterozygous for ALD. |Hershkovitz et al. (2002) reported an 8.5-year-old girl who presented with declining school performance and diffuse frontal white matter demyelination. She was known to be at risk for heterozygosity because 2 maternal uncles had ALD. Levels of very long chain fatty acids were elevated. DNA analysis of the patient and her mother showed a cytosine insertion in codon 515 (515insC) of the ABCD1 gene, resulting in a frameshift after amino acid 171 (tyrosine). Immunocytochemical studies showed that ALDP reactivity was lacking in 99% of the fibroblasts analyzed. Cytogenetic analysis showed a deletion at Xq27.2-qter. Both parents were normal. She underwent bone marrow transplantation from a normal sister and at 18 months was stable. Hershkovitz et al. (2002) recommended that cytogenetic studies be performed in the 1% of heterozygotes who show evidence of cerebral involvement. |Jung et al. (2007) reported 2 unrelated women with heterozygous mutations in the ABCD1 gene. The first patient was diagnosed at age 8 years with manic-hebephrenic disorder and subsequent psychotic episodes. She had spastic paraparesis at age 25 and developed cognitive deficits, cerebellar signs, and more severe spastic paraparesis at age 45. She died of pneumonia at age 52. Her brother had Addison disease at age 47, and later developed spastic paraparesis and polyneuropathy. The second patient developed inability to run at age 35 years, 1 year after her son died of ALD. She was wheelchair-bound by age 48. Later features included bilateral visual loss and mild polyneuropathy. She was cognitively intact. |Kobayashi et al. (1986) described 2 adult male first cousins with spinocerebellar degeneration manifested by progressive limb and truncal ataxia, slurred speech, and spasticity of the limbs. Brain CT scans showed atrophy of the pons and cerebellum. Very long chain fatty acids were elevated in the plasma and red cell membranes of the affected patients and were increased to intermediate levels in the female carriers. |
609423::variation in several different genes influences susceptibility and resistance to HIV-1 infection and the rate of progression to AIDS after infection (see PATHOGENESIS and MOLECULAR GENETICS).|The pathogenesis of HIV infection and the progression from infection to AIDS vary significantly between exposed individuals. Infection occurs after the virus, which has macrophage (M)- and T lymphocyte (T)-tropic strains and more than 12 subtypes, survives an array of nonspecific, nongenetic environmental and host factors.|
103900::glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism (GRA), also referred to as glucocorticoid-suppressible hyperaldosteronism (GSH) or familial hyperaldosteronism type I (HALD1), is the result of an anti-Lepore-type fusion of the CYP11B2 (124080) and CYP11B1 genes (see 610613.0002).|Glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hypertension, variable hyperaldosteronism, and abnormal adrenal steroid production, including 18-oxocortisol and 18-hydroxycortisol (Lifton et al., 1992). There is significant phenotypic heterogeneity, and some individuals never develop hypertension (Stowasser et al., 2000). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Familial Hyperaldosteronism|Familial hyperaldosteronism type II (HALD2; 605635) is caused by mutation in the CLCN2 gene (600570) on chromosome 3q27. Familial hyperaldosteronism type III (HALD3; 613677) is caused by mutation in the KCNJ5 gene (600734) on chromosome 11q24. Familial hyperaldosteronism type IV (HALD4; 617027) is caused by mutation in the CACNA1H gene (607904) on chromosome 16p13.|Sutherland et al. (1966) and Salti et al. (1969) described a father and son with hypertension, low plasma renin activity, and increased aldosterone secretion. The symptoms were responsive to dexamethasone treatment. Growth and sexual development were normal. The father was found to have multiple adrenocortical adenomas. New and Peterson (1967) described 2 cases in a family. Giebink et al. (1973) studied 2 brothers and their mother who had glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism. |Ganguly et al. (1981) reported a kindred with GRA spanning 3 generations. The presumptive diagnosis was first made in a 7-year-old boy and led to the identification in his mother and grandmother. Urinary analysis did not identify a putative 'aldosterone-stimulating factor,' suggesting that GRA is a distinct disorder from idiopathic aldosteronism. Bilateral adrenal hyperplasia was present. Ganguly et al. (1981) reported another affected family. The diagnosis of hyperaldosteronism was established by failure of saline infusion to suppress plasma aldosterone normally and by the failure of furosemide or a low sodium diet to stimulate plasma renin activity. One family had basal serum potassium levels below 3.5 mmol per liter, whereas values were normal in the second family. Ganguly et al. (1981) showed that the paradoxic decline in plasma aldosterone when the patient is in the upright posture, usually observed in aldosterone-producing adenoma, is also seen in GRA. Thus, in patients with primary aldosteronism in whom GSH is suspected on the basis of young age and family history and a postural decline in plasma aldosterone is demonstrated, treatment with glucocorticoid should be given for 4 to 6 weeks before localization procedures are begun. |Gordon (1995) reported phenotypic heterogeneity of GRA in at least 21 members of a large kindred encompassing approximately 1,000 descendants of an English convict transported to Australia in 1837 for highway robbery in Northamptonshire. Affected individuals were often normokalemic, and some remained normotensive until late in life. Gordon (1995) referred to the disorder as 'familial hyperaldosteronism type I.' |Gates et al. (1996) described 2 large pedigrees with GRA confirmed by genetic analysis. Most of the affected members, who had only mild hypertension and normal biochemistry, were clinically indistinguishable from patients with essential hypertension. The authors suggested that GRA is an underdiagnosed condition. |Stowasser et al. (1999) found that 10 normotensive individuals with GRA who did not take antihypertensive medication had normal plasma levels and normal upright aldosterone levels. However, plasma aldosterone failed to rise by at least 50% during 2 hours of upright posture in 5 of 7 subjects, or during a 1-hour infusion of angiotensin II (2 ng/kg-min) in each of 6 subjects so studied. Serial, second-hourly (day-curve) aldosterone levels correlated tightly with cortisol (r of 0.79 to 0.97, P less than 0.01 to 0.001) but not with plasma renin activity (PRA) (r of 0.13 to 0.40, not significant) levels in each of 6 subjects, and plasma aldosterone suppressed to less than 110 pmol/L during 4 days of dexamethasone administration (0.5 mg 6 hourly) in each of 2 patients studied, consistent with ACTH-regulated aldosterone production. The authors concluded that biochemical evidence of excessive, abnormally regulated aldosterone production is present not only in hypertensive individuals with GSH, but also in those who are normotensive. |Stowasser et al. (2000) studied 9 GRA individuals with mild hypertension (normotensive or onset of hypertension after 15 years of age, blood pressure never greater than 160/100 mm Hg, 1 medication or less required to control hypertension, no history of stroke, age greater than 18 years when studied) and 17 GRA individuals with severe hypertension (onset before 15 years of age, or systolic blood pressure greater than 180 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure greater than 120 mm Hg at least once, or more than 2 medications, or history of stroke). Severe hypertension was more frequent in males (11 of 13 males vs 6 of 13 females; P less than 0.05). Four subjects still normotensive after age 18 years were females. Of 10 other affected, deceased individuals (7 males and 3 females) from a single family, 6 who died before 60 years of age (4 by stroke) were males. Aldosterone was unresponsive (rose by less than 50%) to angiotensin II in all subjects. Day-curve studies (blood collected every 2 hours for 24 hours; n = 2 mild and 7 severe) demonstrated abnormal regulation of aldosterone by ACTH rather than by angiotensin II in both groups. The authors concluded that the degree of hybrid gene-induced aldosterone overproduction may have contributed to the severity of hypertension. |Mulatero et al. (2002) reported a 5-generation pedigree from Sardinia in which the presence of the chimeric gene was demonstrated in affected members of 4 generations. This family displayed a mild phenotype, with average blood pressure levels of 131/86 mm Hg for GRA patients. The occurrence of stroke was very low, and preeclampsia was not observed in 29 pregnancies from 8 GRA mothers. Mulatero et al. (2002) found a significant correlation between blood pressure and 18-hydroxycortisol, 18-oxocortisol, and plasma aldosterone levels, but not with kallikrein (KLK1; 147910). However, other biochemical or genetic parameters investigated could not explain the mild phenotype in this family. |
203500::alkaptonuria (AKU) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase gene (HGD; 607474) on chromosome 3q13.|Alkaptonuria is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder characterized by accumulation of homogentisic acid, leading to darkened urine, pigmentation of connective tissue (ochronosis), joint and spine arthritis, and destruction of the cardiac valves (summary by Vilboux et al., 2009). |Alkaptonuria enjoys the historic distinction of being one of the first conditions in which mendelian recessive inheritance was proposed (by Garrod, 1902, on the suggestion of Bateson) and of being 1 of the 4 conditions in the charter group of inborn errors of metabolism. The manifestations are urine that turns dark on standing and alkalinization, black ochronotic pigmentation of cartilage and collagenous tissues, and arthritis, especially characteristic in the spine.|Cunningham et al. (1989) observed rapidly evolving osteoarthrosis of the right hip in a 65-year-old woman who had unusual stress after being forced to abandon a train as a result of a bomb threat and having to carry 2 heavy suitcases. Carrier and Harris (1990) reported the case of a 70-year-old man who underwent bilateral hip and knee total joint arthroplasties for the treatment of ochronotic arthropathy. Dereymaeker et al. (1990) described a patient in whom calcified aortic valve disease secondary to ochronosis necessitated urgent aortic valve replacement. |There are reports of urolithiasis in AKU patients in middle and late adulthood who have already developed the full clinical picture of the disorder (e.g., Sener, 1992). Zibolen et al. (2000) emphasized the increased frequency of urolithiasis in AKU patients younger than 15 years. They reported 5 such patients, in one of whom the diagnosis of urolithiasis had been made at the age of 2 years. | Phornphutkul et al. (2002) provided a review of the natural history of alkaptonuria. They based the review on an evaluation of 58 patients with the disorder ranging in age from 4 to 80 years. They found that joint replacement was performed at a mean age of 55 years and that renal stones developed at 64 years, cardiac-valve involvement at 54 years, and coronary artery calcification at 59 years. Linear regression analysis indicated that the radiographic score for the severity of disease began increasing after the age of 30 years, with a more rapid increase in men than in women. In the 58 patients reviewed by Phornphutkul et al. (2002), kidney stones were documented in 13 male and 3 female patients. Of the 27 men who were 31 to 60 years old, 8 had prostate stones. The development of prostate stones was not associated with the development of kidney stones. Three patients, each over the age of 50 years, had undergone aortic valve replacement. |
107400::The SERPINA1 gene encodes alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT), also known as protease inhibitor (PI), a major plasma serine protease inhibitor. AAT complexes predominantly with elastase, but also with trypsin, chymotrypsin, thrombin, and bacterial proteases. The most important inhibitory action of AAT is that against neutrophil elastase (ELANE, or HLE; 130130), a protease that degrades elastin of the alveolar walls as well as other structural proteins of a variety of tissues (review by Cox, 2001).|
614307::AMACRD deficiency is caused by homozygous mutation in the AMACR gene (604489) on chromosome 5p13.|AMACR deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive peroxisomal disorder characterized by adult onset of variable neurodegenerative symptoms affecting the central and peripheral nervous systems. Features may include seizures, visual failure, sensorimotor neuropathy, spasticity, migraine, and white matter hyperintensities on brain imaging. Serum pristanic acid and C27 bile acid intermediates are increased (summary by Smith et al., 2010). |Ferdinandusse et al. (2000) reported 2 unrelated patients of European descent with a neurologic disorder associated with elevated plasma concentrations of pristanic acid (a branched-chain fatty acid) and the C27 bile acid intermediates di- and trihydroxycholestanoic acid (DHCA and THCA). A 44-year-old man had retinitis pigmentosa with restriction of his visual field and acuity. He also had primary hypogonadism and epileptic seizures. Nerve conduction studies showed a widespread axonal sensorimotor neuropathy affecting the legs more severely than the arms. He had shown mild developmental delay in childhood. Analysis of plasma VLCFAs, branched-chain fatty acids, and bile-acid intermediates ruled out Refsum disease (266500). The second patient was a woman who was well until the age of 48, when she began to tire easily and was found to be hypothyroid. She then developed heaviness of the legs on exercise, with dragging of both feet on walking. She had a spastic paraparesis, but the MRI scan of the cervical spine showed no abnormality. Nerve conduction studies showed a demyelinating polyneuropathy. Analysis of plasma very long chain fatty acids was undertaken to determine whether the patient had adrenomyeloneuropathy (300100) as a symptomatic heterozygote for this X-linked disorder. |McLean et al. (2002) provided a detailed clinical description of the man reported by Ferdinandusse et al. (2000). He was a poor student and unable to keep jobs. At age 18 years, he had an acute encephalitic illness, characterized by headache, nausea, photophobia, confusion, irritability, and coma, that left him temporarily blind. EEG showed generalized slowing and loss of alpha activity. Ophthalmologic examination showed extensive pigmentary retinopathy. He had several seizures over the following years, a decline in vision, and daily migraine headaches after a traffic accident. Physical examination showed primary hypogonadism, distal sensory impairment with an axonal neuropathy, and increased pristanic acid, DHCA, and THCA. |Clarke et al. (2004) reported a 53-year-old woman with AMACR deficiency. She had a long history of tremor affecting the upper limbs, head, and voice, and developed severe depression at age 45 and visual difficulties at age 52. Physical examination showed early cataracts, retinitis pigmentosa, and optic atrophy. She had cerebellar dysarthria with marked postural and intention tremor of all limbs, but no gait ataxia. She also had mild pyramidal weakness. Brain MRI showed deep white matter changes in the pons, basal ganglia, thalami, and cerebral peduncles. Biochemical studies showed increased pristanic acid and increased bile acid intermediates, suggesting AMACR deficiency. The diagnosis was confirmed by enzymatic assay and genetic analysis. She later developed an acute encephalopathic episode with headache, nausea, vomiting, confusion, agitation, and left hemiparesis. EEG showed bihemispheric epileptiform discharges. Plasma exchange decreased the levels of pristanic acid, but there was no clinical improvement. |Thompson et al. (2008) reported a 57-year-old woman who presented with a decline in cognition, apathy, and unsteady gait. She had a complex neurologic history, with onset of seizures in her early teens and episodes of neurologic decline throughout her life. These episodes were characterized by confusion, hemiparesis, headache, and depression. On physical examination, she showed poor attention, poor naming, and apraxic gait. Brain MRI showed diffuse involutional changes and high signals in the cortex and subcortical white matter. Nerve conduction studies showed a mild sensory neuropathy. Laboratory studies showed increased serum pristanic acid, normal phytanic acid, and increased C27 bile acid intermediates, suggesting a peroxisomal disorder. |Smith et al. (2010) reported a 45-year-old man who developed seizures in early adulthood. He had a lifelong difficulty in reading and mathematics. At age 43, he developed status epilepticus resulting in global encephalopathy and left hemiparesis. After some recovery, he had a second episode and was aphasic for a time. He also had primary hypogonadism, retinal pigmentary epithelial changes in the left macula, and a mild peripheral neuropathy with prolonged distal latencies on nerve conduction velocity studies. Biochemical studies showed increased pristanic acid and an increased pristanic:phytanic acid ratio. Dietary restriction of pristanic acid led to some clinical improvement, although there was no change in serum abnormalities. There was no apparent liver disease. |Dick et al. (2011) reported a 58-year-old man who presented with an 8-year history of gait unsteadiness, cerebellar dysarthria, a few tonic/clonic seizures, and decline in short-term memory. Nerve conduction studies showed a mild sensorimotor polyneuropathy, and brain MRI showed high signal on T2-weighted images in the white matter of the cerebral hemispheres, thalami, midbrain, and pons, with brainstem atrophy. There was also some frontal atrophy. Laboratory studies showed increased phytanic and pristanic acids, indicating a peroxisomal disorder. Genetic analysis identified a homozygous mutation in the AMACR gene (S52P; 604489.0001), consistent with AMACR deficiency. Dick et al. (2011) noted the unusual phenotypic presentation in this patient, with minimal cognitive decline and prominent cerebellar ataxia. |
104300::familial Alzheimer disease-1 (AD1) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding the amyloid precursor protein (APP; 104760) on chromosome 21q.|A homozygous mutation in the APP gene with a dominant-negative effect on amyloidogenesis was found in a patient with an early-onset progressive dementia and his affected younger sister (104760.0022).|A coding single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the APP gene (104760.0023) has been shown to have a protective effect against Alzheimer disease.|See also APP-related cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA; 605714), which shows overlapping clinical and neuropathologic features.|Alzheimer disease is the most common form of progressive dementia in the elderly. It is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the neuropathologic findings of intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) and extracellular amyloid plaques that accumulate in vulnerable brain regions (Sennvik et al., 2000). Terry and Davies (1980) pointed out that the 'presenile' form, with onset before age 65, is identical to the most common form of late-onset or 'senile' dementia, and suggested the term 'senile dementia of the Alzheimer type' (SDAT). |Haines (1991) reviewed the genetics of AD. Selkoe (1996) reviewed the pathophysiology, chromosomal loci, and pathogenetic mechanisms of Alzheimer disease. Theuns and Van Broeckhoven (2000) reviewed the transcriptional regulation of the genes involved in Alzheimer disease. |Genetic Heterogeneity of Alzheimer Disease|Alzheimer disease is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. See also AD2 (104310), associated with the APOE*4 allele (107741) on chromosome 19; AD3 (607822), caused by mutation in the presenilin-1 gene (PSEN1; 104311) on 14q; and AD4 (606889), caused by mutation in the PSEN2 gene (600759) on 1q31.|There is evidence for additional AD loci on other chromosomes; see AD5 (602096) on 12p11, AD6 (605526) on 10q24, AD7 (606187) on 10p13, AD8 (607116) on 20p, AD9 (608907), associated with variation in the ABCA7 gene (605414) on 19p13, AD10 (609636) on 7q36, AD11 (609790) on 9q22, AD12 (611073) on 8p12-q22, AD13 (611152) on 1q21, AD14 (611154) on 1q25, AD15 (611155) on 3q22-q24, AD16 (300756) on Xq21.3, AD17 (615080) on 6p21.2, and AD18 (615590), associated with variation in the ADAM10 gene (602192) on 15q21.|Evidence also suggests that mitochondrial DNA polymorphisms may be risk factors in Alzheimer disease (502500).|Finally, there have been associations between AD and various polymorphisms in other genes, including alpha-2-macroglobulin (A2M; 103950.0005), low density lipoprotein-related protein-1 (LRP1; 107770), the transferrin gene (TF; 190000), the hemochromatosis gene (HFE; 613609), the NOS3 gene (163729), the vascular endothelial growth factor gene (VEGF; 192240), the ABCA2 gene (600047), and the TNF gene (191160) (see MOLECULAR GENETICS).|Alzheimer (1907) provided the first report of the disease (see HISTORY).|Schottky (1932) described a familial form of presenile dementia in 4 generations. The diagnosis was confirmed at autopsy in a patient in the fourth generation. Lowenberg and Waggoner (1934) reported a family with unusually early onset of dementia in the father and 4 of 5 children. Postmortem findings in 1 case were consistent with dementia of the Alzheimer type. McMenemey et al. (1939) described 4 affected males in 2 generations with pathologic confirmation in one.|Heston et al. (1966) described a family with 19 affected in 4 generations. Dementia was coupled with conspicuous parkinsonism and long tract signs. |Rice et al. (1980) and Ball (1980) reported a kindred in which members had clinical features of familial AD. Two patients had neuropathologic changes of spongiform encephalopathy of the Creutzfeldt-Jakob type (CJD; 123400) at autopsy, but the long clinical course was unusual for CJD. Corkin et al. (1983) found no difference in parental age of patients with AD compared to controls. Nee et al. (1983) reported an extensively affected kindred, with 51 affected persons in 8 generations. There was no increased incidence of Down syndrome (190685) or hematologic malignancy. |Heyman et al. (1983) found dementia in first-degree relatives of 17 (25%) of 68 probands with AD. These families also demonstrated an increase in the frequency of Down syndrome (3.6 per 1,000 as compared with an expected rate of 1.3 per 1,000). No excess of hematologic malignancy was found in relatives. In a study of the families of 188 Down syndrome children and 185 controls, Berr et al. (1989) found no evidence of an excess of dementia cases suggestive of AD in the families of patients with Down syndrome. In a large multicenter study of first-degree relatives of 118 AD probands and nondemented spouse controls, Silverman et al. (1994) found no association between familial AD and Down syndrome. |Stokin et al. (2005) identified axonal defects in mouse models of Alzheimer disease that preceded known disease-related pathology by more than a year; the authors observed similar axonal defects in the early stages of Alzheimer disease in humans. Axonal defects consisted of swellings that accumulated abnormal amounts of microtubule-associated and molecular motor proteins, organelles, and vesicles. Impairing axonal transport by reducing the dosage of a kinesin molecular motor protein enhanced the frequency of axonal defects and increased amyloid-beta peptide levels and amyloid deposition. Stokin et al. (2005) suggested that reductions in microtubule-dependent transport may stimulate proteolytic processing of beta-amyloid precursor protein (104760), resulting in the development of senile plaques and Alzheimer disease. |Bateman et al. (2012) performed a prospective, longitudinal study analyzing data from 128 subjects at risk for carrying a mutation for autosomal dominant AD. Subjects underwent baseline clinical and cognitive assessments, brain imaging, and cerebrospinal fluid and blood tests. Bateman et al. (2012) used the participant's age at baseline assessment and the parent's age at the onset of symptoms of AD to calculate the estimated years from expected symptom onset (age of the participant minus parent's age at symptom onset). They then conducted cross-sectional analyses of baseline data in relation to estimated years from expected symptom onset in order to determine the relative order and magnitude of pathophysiologic changes. Concentrations of amyloid-beta-42 in the CSF appeared to decline 25 years before expected symptom onset. Amyloid-beta deposition, as measured by positron-emission tomography with the use of Pittsburgh compound B, was detected 15 years before expected symptom onset. Increased concentrations of tau protein in the CSF and an increase in brain atrophy were detected 15 years before expected symptom onset. Cerebral hypometabolism and impaired episodic memory were observed 10 years before expected symptom onset. Global cognitive impairment, as measured by Mini-Mental State Examination and the Clinical Dementia Rating scale, was detected 5 years before expected symptom onset, and patients met diagnostic criteria for dementia at an average of 3 years after expected symptom onset. Bateman et al. (2012) cautioned that their results required confirmation with use of longitudinal data and may not apply to patients with sporadic Alzheimer disease. |Karlinsky et al. (1992) reported a family from Toronto with autosomal dominant inheritance of Alzheimer disease. The disorder was characterized by early onset of memory deficits, decreased speed of cognitive processing, and impaired attention to complex cognitive sets. The family immigrated to Canada from the British Isles in the 18th century. Genetic analysis identified a mutation in the APP gene (V717I; 104760.0002). |Farlow et al. (1994) reviewed the clinical characteristics of the disorder in the AD family reported by Murrell et al. (1991) in which affected members had a mutation in the APP gene (V717F; 104760.0003). The mean age of onset of dementia was 43 years. The earliest cognitive functions affected were recent memory, information-processing speed, sequential tracking, and conceptual reasoning. Language and visuoperceptual skills were largely spared early in the course of the disease. Later, there were progressive cognitive deficits and inability to perform the activities of daily living. Death occurred, on average, 6 years after onset. The family was Romanian, many of its members having migrated to Indiana. |Rossi et al. (2004) reported a family in which at least 6 members spanning 3 generations had Alzheimer disease and strokes associated with a heterozygous mutation in the APP gene (A713T; 104760.0009). At age 52 years, the proband developed progressive cognitive decline with memory loss and visuospatial troubles, as well as stroke-like episodes characterized by monoparesis and language disturbances detectable for a few days. MRI showed T2-weighted signal hyperintensities in subcortical and periventricular white matter without bleeding. Neuropathologic examination showed neurofibrillary tangles and A-beta-40- and A-beta-42-immunoreactive deposits in the neuropil. The vessel walls showed only A-beta-40 deposits, consistent with amyloid angiopathy. There were also multiple white matter infarcts along the long penetrating arteries. Other affected family members had a similar clinical picture. Several unaffected family members carried the mutation, and all but 1 were under 65 years of age. |Edwards-Lee et al. (2005) reported an African American family in which multiple members spanning 3 generations had early-onset AD. The distinctive clinical features in this family were a rapidly progressive dementia starting in the fourth decade, seizures, myoclonus, parkinsonism, and spasticity. Variable features included aggressiveness, visual disturbances, and pathologic laughter. Two sibs who were tested were heterozygous for a mutation in the APP gene (T714I; 104760.0015). |Early-Onset Alzheimer Disease with Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy|Because Alzheimer disease associated with cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is also found in Down syndrome, Rovelet-Lecrux et al. (2006) reasoned that the APP locus located on chromosome 21q21 might be affected by gene dosage alterations in a subset of demented individuals. To test this hypothesis, they analyzed APP using quantitative multiplex PCR of short fluorescent fragments, a sensitive method for detecting duplications that is based on the simultaneous amplification of multiple short genomic sequences using dye-labeled primers under quantitative conditions. This analysis was performed in 12 unrelated individuals with autosomal dominant early-onset Alzheimer disease (ADEOAD) in whom a previous mutation screen of PSEN1 (104311), PSEN2 (600759), and APP had been negative; 5 of these individuals belonged to Alzheimer disease-affected families in which the cooccurrence of CAA had been diagnosed according to neuropathologic (Vonsattel et al., 1991) or clinical criteria (intracerebral hemorrhages (ICH) in at least 1 affected individual). In the 5 index cases with the combination of early-onset Alzheimer disease and CAA, they found evidence for a duplication of the APP locus (104760.0020). In the corresponding families, the APP locus duplication was present in affected subjects but not in healthy subjects over the age of 60 years. The phenotypes of the affected subjects in the 5 families were similar. None had mental retardation before the onset of dementia. None had clinical features suggestive of Down syndrome. The most common clinical manifestation was progressive dementia of Alzheimer disease type (mean age of onset 52 +/- 4.4 years) associated, in some cases, with lobar ICH. Neuropathologic examination of the brains of 5 individuals from 3 kindreds showed abundant amyloid deposits, present both as dense-cored plaques and as diffuse deposits, in all regions analyzed. Neurofibrillary tangles were noted in a distribution consistent with the diagnosis of definite Alzheimer disease. However, the most prominent feature was severe CAA. Rovelet-Lecrux et al. (2006) estimated that in their whole cohort of 65 ADEOAD families, the frequency of the APP locus duplication was roughly 8% (5 of 65), which corresponds to half of the contribution of APP missense mutations to ADEOAD. |
609924::aminoacylase-1 deficiency (ACY1D) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ACY1 gene (104620) on chromosome 3p21.|Aminoacylase-1 deficiency (ACY1D) is a rare autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism characterized by increased urinary excretion of specific N-actyl amino acids. Most patients show neurologic abnormalities such as intellectual disability, seizures, hypotonia, and motor delay (summary by Ferri et al., 2014). |Van Coster et al. (2005) reported an infant with aminoacylase-1 deficiency. He presented neonatally with an acute encephalopathy with onset on the third day of life and duration of about 2 weeks. Clinical features included seizures, apnea, vomiting, hypotonia, and sensorineural hearing loss. Urinalysis detected several N-acetylated amino acids. MRI showed cerebral atrophy. At age 9 months, he had reached normal developmental milestones and there were no abnormal clinical neurologic signs. |Sass et al. (2006) reported 4 children with a genetic deficiency of ACY1. They were identified through organic acid analyses using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, revealing increased urinary secretion of several N-acetylated amino acids, including the derivatives of methionine, glutamic acid, alanine, leucine, glycine, valine, and isoleucine. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy analysis of urine samples detected a distinct pattern of N-acetylated metabolites, consistent with ACY1 dysfunction. Functional analyses of patients' lymphoblasts demonstrated ACY1 deficiency. The clinical phenotypes of the patients were heterogeneous: nonspecific psychomotor delay in 1 subject, psychomotor delay with atrophy of the vermis and syringomyelia in a second, marked muscular hypotonia in a third, and follow-up for early treated biotinidase deficiency with normal clinical findings in the fourth. The organic acids analysis that led to the detection of ACY1 deficiency was part of selective screening for inborn errors of metabolism, which is not performed routinely in healthy children but only in individuals in whom a metabolic disease is considered, resulting in a strong bias. It was uncertain whether ACY1 deficiency had pathogenic significance with pleiotropic clinical expression or was simply a biochemical variant. Sass et al. (2006) noted that the phenotypic variability of the patients did not support ACY1 deficiency as a disease. However, evolutionarily conservation of the ACY1 gene in fish, frog, mouse, and human, and its expression in the central nervous system in human, suggested a role of the enzyme in the amino acid metabolism of these organs. ACY1 is expressed in the kidney, an observation in line with a possible functional role of ACY1 in recycling of N-acetylated amino acids in the kidney, which could explain the highly elevated concentrations of N-acetylated amino acids in the urine of the 4 children harboring ACY1 mutations. Thus, in the case of severe dietary protein restriction, ACY1 dysfunction might contribute to reduced availability of amino acids due to impaired amino acid salvage. This could be a disadvantage during periods of profound catabolism or starvation. In addition, ACY1 deficiency might result in accumulation of acetylated amino acids in analogy to N-acetylaspartic acid in aminoacylase-2 (ACY2) deficiency (Canavan disease; 271900). A role of ACY1 in detoxification of benzoic acid and in the metabolism of certain drugs was suggested by Sass et al. (2006), who also suggested that ACY1 deficiency might have consequences later in life, perhaps as a predisposing factor or modifier. |Sass et al. (2007) reported 3 additional patients with ACY1 deficiency detected through newborn screening. Two patients were born of consanguineous parents of Asian and Romani origin, respectively. The Asian child presented with febrile seizures at 11 months of age, followed 3 months later by more seizures associated with a viral illness. She showed delayed speech and language development at age 4 years. The Romani child had onset of multifocal, drug-resistant epilepsy with atonic, tonic, and absence seizures at age 1 year. He was hyperactive with moderate mental retardation. He also had a broad nasal root and hypertelorism. The third patient, of English origin, presented at age 11 months with a prolonged generalized seizure and transient hemiplegia associated with illness. She showed complete recovery and normal development at age 19 months. |Ferri et al. (2014) reported a 6-year-old girl, born of consanguineous parents, with severe neurologic manifestations associated with ACY1 deficiency. She first presented at age 3 years with an episode of severe opisthotonos. She had a complex nonspecific neurologic phenotype including severe intellectual disability, axial hypotonia with inability to walk, limb hypertonia, and severe speech delay. Brain MRI showed dilatation of the left temporal horn. Urinary organic acid analysis showed increased levels of N-acetyl amino acids, consistent with a diagnosis of ACY1 deficiency. |
607196::Amish lethal microcephaly, also known as thiamine metabolism dysfunction syndrome-3 (THMD3), is caused by homozygous mutation in the SLC25A19 gene (606521) on chromosome 17q25. Thiamine metabolism dysfunction syndrome-4 (THMD4; 613710) is an allelic disorder with a milder phenotype.|Amish type microcephaly is a severe autosomal recessive metabolic disorder characterized by severe microcephaly apparent at birth, profoundly delayed psychomotor development, brain malformations, and episodic encephalopathy associated with lactic acidosis and alpha-ketoglutaric aciduria (summary by Kelley et al., 2002). For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of disorders due to thiamine metabolism dysfunction, see THMD1 (249270).|Kelley et al. (2002) described a metabolic disorder among the Old Order Amish of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, characterized by severe congenital microcephaly, death within the first year, and severe 2-ketoglutaric aciduria. The disorder segregated as an autosomal recessive and had the unusually high incidence of at least 1 in 500 births. When the infants were well, urine organic acid profiles showed isolated, extreme elevations of 2-ketoglutaric acid. However, during otherwise simple viral illnesses, the infants often developed metabolic acidosis, which sometimes followed a lethal course. Cranial MRI of 1 patient showed a smooth, immature brain similar to that of a 20-week fetus except for a moderate degree of cerebellar vermal hypoplasia. Assay of 2-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (613022) in cultured lymphoblasts of 1 patient showed normal activity. |Rosenberg et al. (2002) stated that at least 61 affected infants had been born in the previous 40 years in 23 nuclear families. Affected individuals had head circumferences that were 6 to 12 SD less than the population mean. |Siu et al. (2010) reported a male infant with Amish microcephaly. He was born of distantly related parents in Ontario, Canada, who had Amish ancestors. Microcephaly was first noted at 21 weeks' gestation. At birth, he showed severe microcephaly, a sloping forehead, and extremely small anterior fontanel. He had truncal hypotonia with hypertonia of the extremities, spontaneous myoclonic jerks, and optic nerve atrophy with foveal hypoplasia. He exhibited extreme irritability and developed failure to thrive. Brain MRI showed partial agenesis of the corpus callosum, large cisterna magna communicating with the fourth ventricle, enlarged lateral ventricles, hypoplastic cerebellar vermis, and lissencephaly. He also had spinal dysraphism and osteopenia. The patient was alive at 7 years, with a static microcephaly, profound developmental delay, and metabolic lactic acidosis controlled by a high fat diet. Genetic analysis confirmed the diagnosis by finding the same G177A mutation (606521.0001) observed in other Amish patients with the disorder. |
105400::15 to 20% of cases of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS), referred to here as ALS1, are associated with mutations in the superoxide dismutase-1 gene (SOD1; 147450) on chromosome 21q22. Although most cases of SOD1-related familial ALS follow autosomal dominant inheritance, rare cases of autosomal recessive inheritance have been reported.|Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the death of motor neurons in the brain, brainstem, and spinal cord, resulting in fatal paralysis. ALS usually begins with asymmetric involvement of the muscles in middle adult life. Approximately 10% of ALS cases are familial (Siddique and Deng, 1996). ALS is sometimes referred to as 'Lou Gehrig disease' after the famous American baseball player who was diagnosed with the disorder. |Rowland and Shneider (2001) and Kunst (2004) provided extensive reviews of ALS. Some forms of ALS occur with frontotemporal dementia (FTD). |Familial ALS is distinct from a form of ALS with dementia reported in cases on Guam (105500) (Espinosa et al., 1962; Husquinet and Franck, 1980), in which the histology is different and dementia and parkinsonism complicate the clinical picture. |Genetic Heterogeneity of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis|ALS is a genetically heterogeneous disorder, with several causative genes and mapped loci.|ALS6 (608030) is caused by mutation in the FUS gene (137070) on chromosome 16p11; ALS8 (608627) is caused by mutation in the VAPB gene (605704) on chromosome 13; ALS9 (611895) is caused by mutation in the ANG gene (105850) on chromosome 14q11; ALS10 (612069) is caused by mutation in the TARDBP gene (605078) on 1p36; ALS11 (612577) is caused by mutation in the FIG4 gene (609390) on chromosome 6q21; ALS12 (613435) is caused by mutation in the OPTN gene (602432) on chromosome 10p; ALS14 (613954) is caused by mutation in the VCP gene (601023) gene on chromosome 9p13; ALS15 (300857) is caused by mutation in the UBQLN2 gene (300264) on chromosome Xp11; ALS17 (614696) is caused by mutation in the CHMP2B gene (609512) on chromosome 3p11; ALS18 (614808) is caused by mutation in the PFN1 gene (176610) on chromosome 17p13; ALS19 (615515) is caused by mutation in the ERBB4 gene (600543) on chromosome 2q34; ALS20 (615426) is caused by mutation in the HNRNPA1 gene (164017) on chromosome 12q13; ALS21 (606070) is caused by mutation in the MATR3 gene (164015) on chromosome 5q31; ALS22 (616208) is caused by mutation in the TUBA4A gene (191110) on chromosome 2q35; and ALS23 (617839) is caused by mutation in the ANXA11 gene (602572) on chromosome 10q23. See also FTDALS (105550), caused by mutation in the C9ORF72 gene (614260) on chromosome 9p21.|Loci associated with ALS have been found on chromosomes 18q21 (ALS3; 606640) and 20p13 (ALS7; 608031).|Intermediate-length polyglutamine repeat expansions in the ATXN2 gene (601517) contribute to susceptibility to ALS (ALS13; 183090). Susceptibility to ALS24 (617892) is conferred by mutation in the NEK1 gene (604588) on chromosome 4q33, and susceptibility to ALS25 (617921) is conferred by mutation in the KIF5A gene (602821) on chromosome 12q13. Susceptibility to ALS has been associated with mutations in other genes, including deletions or insertions in the gene encoding the heavy neurofilament subunit (NEFH; 162230); deletions in the gene encoding peripherin (PRPH; 170710); and mutations in the dynactin gene (DCTN1; 601143).|Some forms of ALS show juvenile onset. See juvenile-onset ALS2 (205100), caused by mutation in the alsin (606352) gene on 2q33; ALS4 (602433), caused by mutation in the senataxin gene (SETX; 608465) on 9q34; ALS5 (602099), caused by mutation in the SPG11 gene (610844) on 15q21; and ALS16 (614373), caused by mutation in the SIGMAR1 gene (601978) on 9p13.|Horton et al. (1976) suggested that there are 3 phenotypic forms of familial ALS, each inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder. The first form they delineated is characterized by rapidly progressive loss of motor function with predominantly lower motor neuron manifestations and a course of less than 5 years. Pathologic changes are limited to the anterior horn cells and pyramidal tracts. The second form is clinically identical to the first, but at autopsy additional changes are found in the posterior columns, Clarke column, and spinocerebellar tracts. The third form is similar to the second except for a much longer survival, usually beyond 10 and often 20 years. Examples of type 1 include the families of Green (1960), Poser et al. (1965) and Thomson and Alvarez (1969). Examples of type 2 include the families of Kurland and Mulder (1955) and Engel et al. (1959). Engel et al. (1959) described 2 American families, 1 of which was of Pennsylvania Dutch stock with at least 11 members of 4 generations affected with what was locally and popularly termed 'Pecks disease.' Examples of type 3 include the families of Amick et al. (1971) and Alberca et al. (1981). In the Spanish kindred reported by Alberca et al. (1981), early onset and persistence of muscle cramps, unilateral proximal segmental myoclonus, and early abolition of ankle jerks were conspicuous clinical features. |Brown (1951, 1960) described 2 New England families, Wetherbee and Farr by name, with autosomal dominant inheritance of a rapidly progressive neurodegenerative disorder with loss of anterior horn cells of the spinal cord and bulbar palsy. (See also Hammond, 1888 and Myrianthopoulos and Brown, 1954). Neuropathology showed a classic 'middle-root zone' pattern of posterior column demyelination in addition to involvement of the anteriolateral columns and ventral horn cells. Although the disorder was clinically indistinguishable from ALS, the pattern of posterior column demyelinations was unexpected. Osler (1880) had described the Farr family earlier (McKusick, 1976). Variability in disease severity in the Farr family was indicated by the case of a 78-year-old woman with relatively minor findings who had buried a son and whose mother had been affected (Siddique, 1993). |Powers et al. (1974) reported the first autopsy in a member of the Wetherbee family from Vermont. The patient was a 35-year-old woman who began to experience weakness in the left leg 1 year before her terminal admission. She then gradually developed weakness and atrophy of the left hand, right lower limb, and right hand. One month before admission she developed dyspnea which steadily worsened, and she was admitted to hospital because of severe ventilatory insufficiency secondary to muscle weakness. She showed atrophy of all extremities, areflexia, and, except for slight movement of the left shoulder and right foot, quadriplegia. The patient died on the second hospital day. Autopsy showed severe demyelination type of atrophy of all muscles. Gray atrophy of the lumbar and cervical anterior roots was evident grossly. Microscopic neuronal changes included a moderate loss of neurons from the hypoglossal nuclei and dorsal motor vagal nuclei, severe neuronal loss from the anterior horns of the cervical and lumbar cord with reactive gliosis, eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusions in many of the remaining lumbar anterior horn cells, and a moderately symmetric loss of neurons from the Clarke column. A severe asymmetric loss of axons and myelin was demonstrated throughout the cervical dorsal spinocerebellar tracts and lumbar posterior columns, with moderate loss in the lumbar lateral corticospinal tracts. Powers et al. (1974) concluded that the disorder corresponded exactly to a subgroup of familial ALS described by Hirano et al. (1967). Engel (1976) concluded that the 'Wetherbee ail' and the Farr family disease were consistent with ALS (Engel et al., 1959). |Alter and Schaumann (1976) reported 14 cases in 2 families and attempted a refinement of the classification of hereditary ALS. Hudson (1981) stated that posterior column disease is found in association with ALS in 80% of familial cases. |In a kindred with an apparently 'new' microcephaly-cataract syndrome (212540), reported by Scott-Emuakpor et al. (1977), 10 persons had died of a seemingly unrelated genetic defect--amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. |Veltema et al. (1990) described adult ALS in 18 individuals from 6 generations of a Dutch family. Onset occurred between ages 19 and 46; duration of disease averaged 1.7 years. The clinical symptoms were predominantly those of initial shoulder girdle and ultimate partial bulbar muscle involvement. |Iwasaki et al. (1991) reported a Japanese family in which members in at least 3 generations had ALS. At least 2 individuals in the family also had Ribbing disease (601477), a skeletal dysplasia that was presumably unrelated to the ALS. |
224100::congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type II (CDAN2) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SEC23B gene (610512) on chromosome 20p11.|For a general description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of CDA, see CDAN1 (224120).|Verwilghen et al. (1969) reported 2 families. De Lozzio et al. (1962) studied an affected woman with 2 affected sisters. The parents could not be examined. They demonstrated endopolyploidy by chromosome studies of bone marrow. The karyotype of skin cells was normal. They pointed out that several instances are known in plants and animals where the mitotic process is influenced by mutant genes. Crookston et al. (1969) observed 5 patients, including 2 sisters, with what appeared to be the same disorder: anemia characterized by multiple nuclei in erythroblasts, ineffective erythropoiesis, and lysis of red cells by acidified serum from some persons. |Enquist et al. (1972) described 3 cases in a sibship of 10. They described the occurrence of Gaucher-like histiocytes in bone marrow, resembling those seen in chronic myelogenous leukemia and thalassemia. They made the important observation that heterozygotes may show some of the serologic abnormalities of HEMPAS without clinical disease. Increased susceptibility to lysis by anti-I antibody (110800) is a feature of HEMPAS. Lowenthal et al. (1980) reported an atypical case in a man who was the product of a first-cousin Anglo-Saxon marriage and whose twin brother was also affected. At age 43 years, the man showed 2 unusual features: severe tophaceous gout and massive splenomegaly. Hematologic peculiarities suggested that the disorder in the twins represented a distinct form of congenital dyserythropoietic anemia. |In a retrospective study of 41 patients with CDA II, Perrotta et al. (2000) found that patients with coinheritance of Gilbert syndrome (143500) had a significantly increased risk of hyperbilirubinemia and gallstone formation and a significantly earlier age at diagnosis of gallstones. |Iolascon et al. (2001) reviewed data on 98 patients from unrelated families enrolled in the International Registry of CDA II. The mean age at presentation was 5.2 +/- 6.1 years. Anemia was present in 66% and jaundice in 53.4% of cases. The mean age at correct diagnosis was 15.9 +/- 11.8 years. In 23% of patients for whom data were available, anemia developed during the neonatal period, and 10 of these individuals required transfusions. Splenectomy produced an increased hemoglobin (P less than 0.001) and a reduced bilirubin level (P = 0.007) in comparison with values before splenectomy. Preliminary data indicated that iron overload occurs irrespective of the hemochromatosis genotype. |Bianchi et al. (2009) reported 13 patients from 10 unrelated families with CDA type II. Eleven patients were Italian, 1 was Bolivian, and 1 was Romanian. The age at diagnosis ranged from 2 to 54 years. Variable but common features included splenomegaly with splenectomy, blood transfusion, cholelithiasis, cholecystectomy, anemia, increased reticulocytes, increased unconjugated bilirubin, increased erythrocyte osmotic fragility, and hypoglycosylation of red blood cells. Only 1 patient had neonatal jaundice. |
606788::Eating disorders are characterized by severe disturbances in eating behavior that typically have onset during late adolescence and early adulthood. Three major types are recognized: anorexia nervosa (AN), bulimia nervosa (BN; 607499), and eating disorder not otherwise specified (EDNOS). AN is characterized by obsessive fear of weight gain, severely restricted eating, and low body weight. In women, AN has the highest mortality among the psychiatric disorders (Sullivan, 1995). AN is divided into 2 clinical subtypes, restricting anorexia nervosa (RAN) and binge-eating/purging anorexia nervosa (BPAN). BN can occur at any body weight and is characterized by binge-eating and compensatory weight-loss behaviors. Family studies have indicated an increased prevalence of eating disorders in relatives of probands with AN (Lilenfeld et al., 1998), and twin studies (Holland et al., 1984; Wade et al., 2000) have estimated concordance rates for monozygotic twins with AN to be 52 to 56%, whereas concordance rates for dizygotic twins with AN have been estimated to be 5 to 11% (Grice et al., 2002). |
201750::Antley-Bixler syndrome with disordered steroidogenesis (ABS1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (POR; 124015) on chromosome 7q11.|A form of Antley-Bixler syndrome with normal steroidogenesis (ABS2; 207410) is a distinct disorder caused by mutation in the FGFR2 gene (176943). Congenital adrenal hyperplasia without Antley-Bixler skeletal anomalies can also result from POR mutations (613571).|The Antley-Bixler syndrome (ABS) is an exceptionally rare craniosynostosis syndrome characterized by radiohumeral synostosis present from the perinatal period. There is a wide spectrum of anomalies seen in ABS; other features include midface hypoplasia, choanal stenosis or atresia, multiple joint contractures, visceral anomalies (particularly of the genitourinary system), and impaired steroidogenesis (present only in patients with POR mutations). Mortality has been reported to be as high as 80% in the neonatal period, primarily due to airway compromise, and prognosis improves with increasing age (summary by McGlaughlin et al., 2010). |Miller (2008) considered the phenotypic overlap between ABS caused by POR mutations and ABS caused by FGFR2 mutations (ABS2; 207410) impressive. Aside from genital anomalies and disordered pattern of steroidogenesis present in patients with POR mutations, no dysmorphic feature appears to distinguish the 2 groups.|Reardon et al. (2000) was impressed with the occurrence of genital abnormalities in patients, especially females, who had been diagnosed as having Antley-Bixler syndrome. They reported abnormalities of steroid biogenesis in 7 of 16 patients with an Antley-Bixler phenotype. Reardon et al. (2000) suggested that ABS with disordered steroidogenesis might be a distinct genetic entity. |
218030::apparent mineralocorticoid excess (AME) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the HSD11B2 gene (614232) on chromosome 16.|Apparent mineralocorticoid excess (AME) is an autosomal recessive form of low-renin hypertension associated with low aldosterone, metabolic alkalosis, hypernatremia, and hypokalemia. The disorder is due to a congenital defect in 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type II (HSD11B2) activity, resulting in decreased conversion of biologically active cortisol to inactive cortisone; this defect allows cortisol to act as a ligand for the mineralocorticoid receptor, resulting in sodium retention and volume expansion. There is a favorable therapeutic response to spironolactone (review by Ferrari, 2010). |Werder et al. (1974) reported a 3-year-old girl with low birth weight, short stature, polydipsia, polyuria, and hypertension in the absence of genital anomalies. Laboratory studies showed hypernatremia, hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and suppressed renin and aldosterone. Urinary steroid profile showed low tetrahydrocortisone, although plasma cortisol was normal. Dexamethasone and spironolactone resulted in alleviation of the hypertension. The findings were consistent with mineralocorticoid excess. Atanasov et al. (2007) provided follow-up of the patient reported by Werder et al. (1974), who reappeared at age 40 years with subarachnoid hemorrhage and end-stage renal failure resulting from untreated hypertension. |In 2 unrelated patients, Ulick et al. (1979) described a disorder in the peripheral metabolism of cortisol, manifested by hypertension, hypokalemia, low plasma renin activity, and responsiveness to spironolactone. Aldosterone levels were subnormal. Although the features suggested primary mineralocorticoid excess, no overproduction of mineralocorticoid could be demonstrated. One of the patients, who had been reported by New et al. (1977), was a 3-year-old Zuni Indian girl with hypertension, hypokalemia, and decreased secretion of all known sodium-retaining corticosteroids. The second patient was a boy of Middle Eastern parentage who had a stroke with residual left hemiparesis at age 7, and was first found to be hypertensive at age 9 (blood pressure as high as 250/180 mm Hg). Other findings included growth retardation, grade III retinopathy, hypokalemia, and hyposthenuria. Biochemical studies indicated a decreased rate of conversion of active cortisol to cortisone, and the authors postulated a defect in 11-beta-hydroxy oxidation of cortisol. Ulick et al. (1979) suggested the term 'apparent mineralocorticoid excess.' |Monder et al. (1986) studied 3 children, including 2 sibs, with AME. There was hypertension and hypokalemic alkalosis in the presence of low plasma renin activity and subnormal levels of aldosterone and other known mineralocorticoids. The symptoms responded to spironolactone administration or a low sodium diet, suggesting that they are mediated by the mineralocorticoid receptor. Metyrapone was also effective, indicating that the steroid occupying the receptor is 11-beta-hydroxylated. Administration of cortisol or of ACTH exacerbated the hypertension. |Stewart et al. (1988) investigated the first adult patient with AME. |Nikkila et al. (1993) reported 4 patients with AME. One presented at 18 months with hypertension, hypokalemia, and low renin and aldosterone levels, and at age 5 years had evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy and an old infarct of the left cerebellum on brain MRI. Another patient presented at 4 years of age with similar manifestations. At age 10.5 years, this patient had developed complications of hypertension, including grade I hypertensive retinopathy and left ventricular hypertrophy. |Li et al. (1998) reported a large consanguineous Sardinian kindred with AME. Affected individuals were more than 30 years of age and had both mineralocorticoid hypertension and evidence of impaired metabolism of cortisol to cortisone. The heterozygote state was phenotypically normal, but was associated with subtle defects in cortisol metabolism. |Wilson et al. (1998) reported a patient from a consanguineous Mennonite family with a mild form of AME due to a homozygous mutation in the HSD11B2 gene (P227L; 614232.0007). She had low-renin hypertension, but did not demonstrate the typical features of AME. Biochemical analysis revealed a moderately elevated cortisol to cortisone metabolite ratio. The conversion of cortisol to cortisone was 58% compared to 0 to 6% in patients with typical AME (the normal conversion is 90 to 95%). The parents and sibs were heterozygous for this mutation. Because approximately 40% of patients with essential hypertension demonstrate low renin, Wilson et al. (1998) suggested that such patients should undergo genetic analysis of the HSD11B2 gene. In an extensive review of steroid disorders in children, specifically congenital adrenal hyperplasia and apparent mineralocorticoid excess, New and Wilson (1999) provided further information concerning what they alleged was the first reported patient with a mild form of AME. Asymptomatic hypertension was diagnosed at age 12.5 years during a sports physical. The parents were consanguineous Mennonites of Prussian descent (Alexanderwohl Church). The only family member with hypertension was the maternal grandmother. Although the patient lacked hypokalemia and low birth weight and had only mild hypertension, New and Wilson (1999) established the diagnosis for AME genetically. |
207800::argininemia is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation arginase-1 gene (ARG1; 608313) on chromosome 6q23.|Arginase deficiency is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism caused by a defect in the final step in the urea cycle, the hydrolysis of arginine to urea and ornithine.|Urea cycle disorders are characterized by the triad of hyperammonemia, encephalopathy, and respiratory alkalosis. Five disorders involving different defects in the biosynthesis of the enzymes of the urea cycle have been described: ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (311250), carbamyl phosphate synthetase deficiency (237300), argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency, or citrullinemia (215700), argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (207900), and arginase deficiency.|Terheggen et al. (1969, 1970) described 2 sisters, aged 18 months and 5 years, with spastic paraplegia, epileptic seizures, and severe mental retardation. The parents were related. Arginine levels were high in the blood and spinal fluid of the patients, with intermediate elevations in both parents and in 2 healthy sibs. Arginase activity in red cells was very low in the patients and intermediate in the parents. In 1971 another affected girl was born into the family observed by Terheggen et al. (1972, 1975). There was late introduction of a low protein diet, but the infant developed severe mental retardation, athetosis, and spasticity. |Cederbaum et al. (1977) reported a 7.5-year-old boy with progressive psychomotor retardation, behavior disturbance, and spasticity, who had growth arrest from age 3 years. Plasma arginine was increased, and red blood cell arginase activity was less than 1% of normal, whereas it was half-normal in both parents, 2 unaffected sibs, and in his paternal grandfather. Cederbaum et al. (1977) concluded that arginase deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder. Michels and Beaudet (1978) reported an affected Mexican child with growth retardation, microcephaly, mental retardation, spasticity, and epileptiform discharges on EEG. |In the province of Quebec, Qureshi et al. (1983) identified an affected French-Canadian family. Both parents showed activity of arginase 32 to 38% of normal. Walser (1983) stated that only 8 kindreds (with 13 patients) had been reported and that 4 of these (with 7 patients) were Spanish or Spanish-American. Jorda et al. (1986) described an unusually severe case of arginase deficiency in a Spanish infant who showed marked protein intolerance early in life. The levels of red cell arginase in the parents and 1 sister were consistent with heterozygosity. Brockstedt et al. (1990) described argininemia in a 4-year-old boy born of consanguineous Pakistani parents. He had microcephaly and spastic tetraplegia. Pregnancy and birth were uneventful and psychomotor development during the first 2 years of life were presumably normal. Vilarinho et al. (1990) described argininemia in a 5-year-old Portuguese boy who did not show spastic diplegia. His first manifestation, at 3.5 years of age, was a partial seizure for 15 minutes without loss of consciousness. Six months later he showed the same clinical features over a period of 15 days. The electroencephalogram showed partial left temporal and paracentral spikes. At 4.5 years of age he began to have episodes of vomiting, hypotonia, irritability, and ataxia. |In a patient dying with severe argininemia, Grody et al. (1989) demonstrated total absence of arginase I in tissues, whereas arginase II was increased about 4-fold in kidney. The patient, an offspring of first-cousin parents of Cambodian descent, died at 6 months of age. Although Southern blot analysis failed to show a substantial deletion in the ARG1 gene, no cross-reactive arginine I protein could be demonstrated by immunoprecipitation-competition and Western blot analysis. Induction studies in cell lines that express only the type II isozyme indicated that its activity could be enhanced several fold by exposure to elevated arginine levels. This presumably was the mechanism for the high level of the enzyme in the patient and explained the fact that there is persistent ureagenesis in this disorder. |Christmann et al. (1990) described a patient in whom the diagnosis of argininemia was first made at the age of 18 years when treatment with sodium valproate was initiated for seizures. The patient had psychomotor regression since the age of 15 months with paraparesis since she was 3 years old. By the age of 18, she was bedridden. Five days after the initiation of valproate therapy, she went into a state of stupor and was found to have marked hyperammonemia. 'Valproate sensitivity' has been observed also with ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency and citrullinemia, 2 other causes of hyperammonemia. Scheuerle et al. (1993) described 2 unrelated patients, aged 9 and 5 years, who had been thought to have cerebral palsy and were later found to have arginase deficiency. The experience suggested that the condition may be underdiagnosed because of its relatively mild symptoms. The authors noted that arginase deficiency does not commonly have the severe hyperammonemia seen with other urea cycle disorders. |Cowley et al. (1998) described an 18-year-old woman, born of related parents, who had been well as a child with normal growth and development. She presented for investigation of collapse with sudden onset of spastic diplegia. She had mild, tender hepatomegaly. Over the previous 6 months, she had been ill with episodic nausea and vomiting, and had experienced some degree of lower limb weakness over the previous 2 weeks. The spastic diplegia in this patient was considered stereotypical of arginase deficiency. No arginase activity was detected in liver tissue; red cell arginase activity was low normal. |Picker et al. (2003) described a rare neonatal and fatal presentation of arginase deficiency in a 2-day-old female with markedly elevated plasma arginine, lactate, and CSF glutamine, and modestly elevated blood ammonia, who developed hypertonia and tachypnea followed by intractable seizures and global cerebral edema. The infant also had an atypical presence of the ARG2 isozyme (107830) in the liver. Picker et al. (2003) suggested that the cerebral edema and the fatal course, both of which have been reported in older patients, were due to the increased intracellular osmolarity of the elevated glutamine. |Batshaw et al. (2014) reported the results of an analysis of 614 patients with urea cycle disorders (UCDs) enrolled in the Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium's longitudinal study protocol. Arginase deficiency occurred in 22 patients (3.5%). |
207900::argininosuccinic aciduria is caused by homozygous mutation in the gene encoding argininosuccinate lyase (ASL; 608310) on chromosome 7q11.|Argininosuccinic aciduria is an autosomal recessive disorder of the urea cycle. Urea cycle disorders are characterized by the triad of hyperammonemia, encephalopathy, and respiratory alkalosis. Five disorders involving different defects in the biosynthesis of the enzymes of the urea cycle have been described: ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (311250), carbamyl phosphate synthetase deficiency (237300), argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency, or citrullinemia (215700), argininosuccinate lyase deficiency, and arginase deficiency (207800).|Erez (2013) reviewed argininosuccinic aciduria and progress in understanding it as a monogenic disorder that, like other inborn errors of metabolism, manifests as a multifactorial disorder at the phenotypic level. |Two forms of argininosuccinic aciduria have been recognized: an early-onset, or malignant, type and a late-onset type.|As originally described by Allan et al. (1958), onset of symptoms of argininosuccinic aciduria occurs in the first weeks of life. Features include mental and physical retardation, convulsions, episodic unconsciousness, liver enlargement, skin lesions, and dry and brittle hair showing trichorrhexis nodosa microscopically and fluorescing red. Coryell et al. (1964) reported familial association of argininosuccinic aciduria. They noted that in the U.S., where arginine is probably supplied adequately by the usual diet, brittle hair may not occur as often as in Great Britain, where the average protein intake is less ample. Shih et al. (1969) reported deficiency of argininosuccinase in cultured fibroblasts from patients. |Lewis and Miller (1970) described the neuropathologic changes in argininosuccinic aciduria. They noted that astrocyte transformation to Alzheimer type II glia may be a consistent feature of any form of hyperammonemia. Postmortem liver showed marked deficiency of argininosuccinate lyase. |Asai et al. (1998) described fatal hyperammonemia in a child with argininosuccinic aciduria following enflurane anesthesia. The diagnosis of argininosuccinic aciduria had been made while the patient was hospitalized for febrile seizures at the age of 18 months. Plasma argininosuccinate was markedly elevated. Argininosuccinase activity was absent in her erythrocytes and was within the heterozygous range in both parents. Oral arginine supplementation and a low protein diet were started. At 13 years of age, the patient underwent an inguinal hernioplasty. The preoperative state was satisfactory except for hepatomegaly and mental retardation. All routine investigations were normal, including those for ammonia. During the second evening after operation, the patient became lethargic with frequent convulsions despite adequate levels of the 3 antiepileptics on which she had been maintained for many years. Despite intravenous hypertonic glucose and arginine supplementation, her ammonia level rose greatly and she became comatose. Despite repeated hemodialysis, she died on the sixth postoperative day. Hepatic findings were consistent with fatty changes. Asai et al. (1998) suggested that although it was tempting to conclude that only enflurane was directly responsible for the hyperammonemia in the patient and although this relationship was not proved beyond reasonable doubt, general anesthesia, including enflurane, should be avoided in patients with argininosuccinic aciduria. |Kleijer et al. (2002) reported a biochemical variant of argininosuccinate lyase deficiency found in 5 individuals. In comparison to classic cases, the variant cases of argininosuccinate lyase deficiency were characterized by residual enzyme activity as measured by the incorporation of C-14-citrulline into proteins. The 5 patients of different ethnic backgrounds presented with relatively mild clinical symptoms, variable age of onset, marked argininosuccinic aciduria, and severe, but not complete, deficiency of argininosuccinate lyase. C14-citrulline incorporation into proteins, which is completely blocked in classic argininosuccinic aciduria, was only partially reduced in fibroblasts of these patients. All of these patients were found to have mutations in the ASL gene (see, e.g., 608310.0004-608310.0006). The authors concluded that there are patients of different ethnic backgrounds who are characterized by residual activity of argininosuccinate lyase and who present with less severe clinical course. |Batshaw et al. (2014) reported the results of an analysis of 614 patients with urea cycle disorders (UCDs) enrolled in the Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium's longitudinal study protocol. Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency was found in 95 individuals (15.5%). The risk of mortality (neonatal plus late onset) was 6%. |Kho et al. (2018) observed that among 8 children with ASLD, blood pressure values were significantly above the expected distribution from normal population values. The children were enrolled in a randomized clinical trial evaluating the effects of arginine therapy on hepatic function, and blood pressures were recorded daily over a 2-week period. Arginine therapy did not affect the blood pressure values. In vitro studies of human aortic endothelial cells and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived endothelial cells from individuals with ASLD showed that loss of ASL in endothelial cells led to endothelial-dependent vascular dysfunction with reduced nitric oxide (NO) signaling, increased oxidative stress, and impaired angiogenesis. These results as well as observations in endothelial-specific Asl knockout mice (see ANIMAL MODEL) led Kho et al. (2018) to conclude that endothelial dysfunction is a primary driver of hypertension in ASLD, through the possible mechanisms of increased vascular tone and altered vascular structure. |
613546::aromatase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the CYP19A1 gene (107910) on chromosome 15q21.|Aromatase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disorder in which individuals cannot synthesize endogenous estrogens. If a fetus lacks aromatase activity, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate produced by the fetal adrenal glands cannot be converted to estrogen by the placenta, and is converted to testosterone peripherally and results in virilization of both fetus and mother. Virilization manifests as pseudohermaphroditism in female infants, with hirsutism and acne in the mother; the maternal indicators resolve following delivery. Affected females are usually diagnosed at birth because of the pseudohermaphroditism. Cystic ovaries and delayed bone maturation can occur during childhood and adolescence in these girls, who present at puberty with primary amenorrhea, failure of breast development, virilization, and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. Affected males do not present with obvious defects at birth. Their clinical symptoms include tall stature, delayed skeletal maturation, delayed epiphyseal closure, bone pain, eunuchoid body proportions, and excess adiposity. Estrogen replacement therapy reverses the symptoms in males and females (summary by Jones et al., 2007).|Mango et al. (1978) reported the case of a primigravida who showed low urinary estrogen excretion and demonstrated lack of placental aromatase activity by in vitro assays. The first report of well-substantiated placental aromatase deficiency appears to be that by Shozu et al. (1991). The deficiency caused maternal virilization during pregnancy and pseudohermaphroditism of the female fetus. Maternal serum levels of estrogens were low and those of androgens were high in the third trimester. The mother delivered vaginally a live, full-term, 46,XX infant who showed male-appearing external genitalia with a greatly enlarged phallus, complete fusion of posterior scrotolabial folds, rugation of the scrotolabial folds, and a single meatus at the base of the phallus. The maternal manifestations of virilization disappeared gradually after delivery and the baby grew uneventfully. Levels of immunologically reactive 17-beta-estradiol in the infant's serum were normal at 2 to 6 months of age. It was unclear whether the aromatization defect existed only in the placenta or in her entire body. |Bulun (1996) reviewed the clinical features of aromatase deficiency in the then-known 7 affected individuals reported to have P450arom gene defects, including 1 Japanese female infant (Shozu et al., 1991), 1 American adolescent female (Conte et al., 1994), and 2 American adult sibs, 1 female and 1 male (Morishima et al., 1995). The phenotypes of these cases included maternal virilization during the second half of pregnancy; clitoromegaly and posterior labioscrotal fusion in newborn affected females; and absent growth spurt, breast development, primary amenorrhea, virilization and multicystic ovaries in adult affected females. While only 1 affected male had been reported, normal genitalia were noted at birth, normal pubertal development occurred, and adult stature was extremely tall (greater than 3 SD) with osteoporosis, macroorchidism, and infertility (Morishima et al. (1995); Bulun (1996)). |In a 29-year-old man with aromatase deficiency, Maffei et al. (2004) reported continuing linear growth, eunuchoid body proportions, diffuse bone pain, and bilateral cryptorchidism. The patient had a complex dysmetabolic syndrome characterized by insulin resistance, diabetes mellitus type 2, acanthosis nigricans, liver steatohepatitis, and signs of precocious atherogenesis. Testosterone treatment at high doses resulted in a severe imbalance in the estradiol-to-testosterone ratio together with insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus type 2. Estrogen treatment resulted in an improvement of acanthosis nigricans, insulin resistance, and liver steatohepatitis, coupled with a better glycemic control and the disappearance of 2 carotid plaques. Testis biopsy showed a pattern of total germ cell depletion that might be due to the concomitant presence of bilateral cryptorchidism. The authors concluded that this case of aromatase deficiency confirmed previous data on bone maturation and mineralization and revealed a high risk for the precocious development of cardiovascular disease in young aromatase-deficient men. |
608643::aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the AADC gene (DDC; 107930) on chromosome 7p12.|AADC deficiency is an autosomal recessive inborn error in neurotransmitter metabolism that leads to combined serotonin and catecholamine deficiency (Abeling et al., 2000). The disorder is clinically characterized by vegetative symptoms, oculogyric crises, dystonia, and severe neurologic dysfunction, usually beginning in infancy or childhood (summary by Brun et al., 2010). |Hyland and Clayton (1990) and Hyland et al. (1992) reported male monozygotic twins born to first-cousin parents who presented at the age of 2 months with severe hypotonia and paroxysmal movements consisting of crying followed by extension of the arms and legs, oculogyric crises, and cyanosis. They also showed occasional choreoathetoid movements of the extremities. Later, defects in temperature regulation and postural hypotension were observed. Laboratory analyses showed a greatly decreased concentration of homovanillic acid (HVA) and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) in the CSF, as well as decreased whole blood serotonin and plasma catecholamines. There was a significant elevation in the urinary excretion of L-DOPA, 5-hydroxytryptophan (5HTP), and 3-methoxytyrosine, all of which precede the AADC step in the biochemical pathway. The findings demonstrated that serotonin and dopamine synthesis were affected in both the central and peripheral nervous systems, consistent with a deficiency of AADC. AADC enzyme activity was severely reduced in plasma and in liver tissue (1% of control). Treatment with a monoamine oxidase inhibitor, a dopamine agonist, and pyridoxine resulted in a striking improvement in tone and movement. The parents were asymptomatic, but had biochemical profiles consistent with their being heterozygous for AADC deficiency. |Maller et al. (1997) reported an Iranian patient born of consanguineous parents who presented in infancy with hypotonia, paroxysmal episodes of inconsolable crying with eyes 'rolling backwards,' extension of extremities, and temperature instability. At age 5 years, he had severe developmental delay, profound hypotonia, and increased muscle tone in the extremities with brisk tendon reflexes and extensor plantar responses. Spontaneous movements were choreoathetoid, and he had increased sweating. CSF, blood, and urine analyses, as well as low AADC enzyme activity, were consistent with AADC deficiency. Korenke et al. (1997) reported a German patient with AADC born of unrelated parents. The clinical phenotype and laboratory findings were similar to previously reported cases. Korenke et al. (1997) and Maller et al. (1997) noted the clinical similarities between AADC deficiency and dihydropteridine reductase deficiency (261630). |Abeling et al. (1998) reported a Dutch girl with AADC deficiency who had a milder clinical phenotype, although she still exhibited psychomotor retardation and the characteristic hypertonic episodes with oculogyric crises. CSF showed decreased 5-HIAA and HVA, and urine showed decreased 5-HIAA, vanillylmandelic acid (VMA), and norepinephrine, elevated L-DOPA, but also elevated dopamine and HVA, which should have been decreased on the basis of the enzyme defect. Plasma AADC activity was undetectable. Abeling et al. (1998) suggested that the AADC deficiency was confined to the cerebral compartment. In examining several AADC patients, including the patient reported by Abeling et al. (1998), Abeling et al. (2000) found that all patients had hyperdopaminuria, which was increased after L-DOPA administration. HVA was also increased. The authors noted that dopamine is produced in the kidney by a renal form of AADC which is present in the proximal renal tubules and involved in the renal handling of sodium. In AADC-deficient patients, these renal cells receive increased amounts of the accumulated substrate L-DOPA, which is rapidly converted to dopamine and HVA. |Swoboda et al. (2003) reviewed the clinical phenotype of 11 patients with AADC deficiency, including 4 previously reported patients. Neonatal symptoms included poor feeding, lethargy, ptosis, hypothermia, and hypotension. All patients demonstrated intermittent eye movement abnormalities, truncal hypotonia, limb hypertonia, and impaired voluntary movements. The majority also showed emotional lability and irritability. Other features included myoclonus, dystonia, paroxysmal sweating, and gastrointestinal problems, such as reflux disease, constipation, and diarrhea. Functional clinical outcomes were poor. |Brun et al. (2010) reviewed the clinical courses of 78 patients with AADC deficiency, including 32 patients who were reported for the first time. Most (96%) had symptoms evidence in infancy or childhood, including hypotonia (95%), oculogyric crises (86%), and developmental retardation (63%). The disorder became apparent during adolescence or adulthood in 6 patients. Other more variable features included autonomic symptoms, such as excessive sweating or temperature instability, feeding or speech difficulty, and movement disorders, including hypokinesia, dystonia, athetosis, and chorea. Many had insomnia and irritability, and 49 had motor or mental retardation. Laboratory data consistently showed low CSF levels of homovanillic acid, 5-hydroxyindoleacidic acid, and 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenolglycole, with increased 3-O-methyl-L-DOPA, L-DOPA, and 5-hydroxytryptophan. Urinary vanillactic acid was found in a few cases. Plasma AADC activity, when measured, was low or absent. About 24% of patients had an abnormal brain MRI, with cerebral atrophy, degenerative changes of the white matter, thinning of the corpus callosum, or a leukodystrophy-like pattern. |
208400::aspartylglucosaminuria (AGU) is caused by homozygous mutation in the AGA gene (613228) on chromosome 4q34.|Aspartylglucosaminuria is a severe autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder that involves the central nervous system and causes skeletal abnormalities as well as connective tissue lesions. The most characteristic feature is progressive mental retardation. The disorder is caused by deficient activity of the lysosomal enzyme glycosylasparaginase, which results in body fluid and tissue accumulation of a series of glycoasparagines, i.e., glycoconjugates with an aspartylglucosamine moiety at the reducing end. AGU belongs to the group of disorders commonly referred to as the Finnish disease heritage (summary by Mononen et al., 1993 and Arvio and Arvio, 2002). |Aspartylglucosaminuria was first reported by Jenner and Pollitt (1967) and Pollitt et al. (1968), who found urinary excretion of abnormal amounts of 2-acetamido-1-(beta-L-aspartamido)-1,2-dideoxyglucose in a 32-year-old female and her 20-year-old brother with mental retardation. An enzyme responsible for hydrolyzing this compound is normally present in seminal fluid but was absent in that of the brother. A generalized lack of this enzyme was postulated. Both sibs had thick sagging skin of the cheeks, a finding not present in normal members of the family. |Palo and Mattsson (1970) reported 11 cases in Finland. The parents of 1 patient were first cousins. The Finnish cases showed, in addition to severe mental retardation, sagging cheeks, broad nose and face, short neck, cranial asymmetry, scoliosis, periodic hyperactivity, and vacuolated lymphocytes. Diarrhea and frequent infections were problems in infancy. Aspartylglucosaminuria has also been observed in Finns living in Norway (Borud and Torp, 1976). |Gehler et al. (1981) described affected brother and sister in a consanguineous Italian sibship; one of the patients showed angiokeratoma corporis diffusum. Yoshida et al. (1991) and Vargas-Diez et al. (2002) also described the occurrence of angiokeratoma corporis diffusum in 2 Japanese patients and 1 Spanish patient, respectively, with aspartylglucosaminuria. |Stevenson et al. (1982) reported this disorder in an 18-year-old American. The family name was Scottish-Irish. The mother was said to have been aged 13 years and the father was unknown--circumstances suggesting incest. Mental retardation, recurrent infections, cardiomyopathy, and emotional lability were features.|Hreidarsson et al. (1983) reported a case in an American black and an American white of uncertain parentage. Radiographic changes in the hands were noted: thin epiphyses, broad 'poorly modeled' (undertubulated) metacarpals, and peculiarly shaped carpal bones. |Isenberg and Sharp (1975) reported the case of a girl of Mexican-Italian extraction living in the U.S.|Musumeci et al. (1984) reported a child with both enzymopathic methemoglobinemia (250800) and AGU. Since the structural genes for the enzymes deficient in these 2 disorders are on separate chromosomes, a single mutation such as a small deletion is not likely to be the basis. Furthermore, a sib had only AGU. The parents were consanguineous. |Chitayat et al. (1988) described 3 Puerto Rican brothers, with first-cousin parents, who had AGU. Two of the brothers were monozygotic twins. Macroorchidism became evident in all 3 boys at the time of puberty. This feature had not previously been noted in AGU, although other endocrinologic abnormalities had been described. |Yoshida et al. (1991) described the first Japanese patients with AGU--a brother and sister, aged 45 and 41, respectively. Both sibs had mental retardation, coarse facial features, angiokeratoma, and myoclonic seizures. |Zlotogora et al. (1997) diagnosed this disorder in 8 patients originating from 3 unrelated families, all Palestinian Arabs from the region of Jerusalem. |Gordon et al. (1998) described a Canadian family in which 4 of 12 sibs were affected, 2 brothers and 2 sisters. Though apparently normal at birth, their developmental milestones, particularly speech, were slow, and they acquired only a simple vocabulary. There was a progressive coarsening of facial features; 3 had inguinal hernia and recurrent diarrhea; all became severely retarded and by the fourth decade showed evident deterioration of both cognitive and motor skills; and 2 exhibited cyclic behavioral changes. Three of the sibs had died, at 33, 39, and 44 years of age. |Arvio et al. (1999) studied 66 Finnish patients with AGU for changes in the oral mucosa and 44 of those for changes in facial skin. Nine patients had facial angiofibromas. Edema of the buccal mucosa and gingival overgrowths were more frequent in AGU patients than in controls (P less than 0.001). Of 16 oral mucosal lesions studied histologically, 15 represented fibroepithelial or epithelial hyperplasias. Cytoplasmic vacuolization was evident in only 4. Expression of AGA in mucosal lesions of AGU patients did not differ from that seen in corresponding lesions of normal subjects. |
600807::multiple loci and candidate genes have been implicated in the causation of asthma and asthma-related traits (ASRT). See, e.g., ASRT1 (607277), associated with a mutation in the PTGDR gene (604687) on chromosome 14q24; ASRT2 (608584), associated with mutation in the GPRA gene (608595) on 7p15-p14; ASRT3 (609958), which has been mapped to chromosome 2p; ASRT4 (610906), which has been mapped to chromosome 1p31; and ASRT5 (611064), associated with variation in the IRAK3 gene (604459) on 12q14.3. ASRT6 (611403) is associated with markers on chromosome 17q21 and transcript levels of ORMDL3 (610075). ASRT7 (611960) is associated with polymorphism in the CHI3L1 gene (601525) on chromosome 1q32.1, and ASRT8 (613207) has been mapped to chromosome 9q33.|Polymorphisms in the HNMT gene (605238) and the ADRB2 gene (109690) have also been associated with susceptibility to asthma.|Balaci et al. (2007) stated that in the previous decade several loci and more than 100 genes had been found to be associated with asthma in at least 1 population. |Bronchial asthma is the most common chronic disease affecting children and young adults. It is a complex genetic disorder with a heterogeneous phenotype, largely attributed to the interactions among many genes and between these genes and the environment.|Asthma-related traits include clinical symptoms of asthma, such as coughing, wheezing, and dyspnea; bronchial hyperresponsiveness (BHR) as assessed by methacholine challenge test; serum IgE levels; atopy; and atopic dermatitis (Laitinen et al., 2001; Illig and Wjst, 2002; Pillai et al., 2006). See 147050 for information on the asthma-associated phenotype atopy. |A critical phenotypic characteristic of human asthma and an important feature of animal models of asthma is airway hyperresponsiveness (Hirshman et al., 1984; Levitt and Mitzner, 1988; Levitt and Mitzner, 1989). |
608688::AICAR transformylase/IMP cyclohydrolase deficiency is caused by compound heterozygous mutation in the ATIC gene (601731) on chromosome 2q35. One such patient has been reported.|Marie et al. (2004) described a 4-year-old girl who presented with a devastating neurologic picture involving profound mental retardation, epilepsy, dysmorphic features, and congenital blindness. Dysmorphic features included cutaneous dimples on the extensor side of knees, elbows, and shoulders. By age 12 months, bilateral atrophic pigmented chorioretinal macular lesions had developed with optic atrophy, and abnormal electroretinograms and visual evoked potentials were observed. Chromatograms of the patient's urine revealed 3 peaks seen neither in control individuals' urine nor in that of ADSL (608222)-deficient patients (103050). The major peak was identified as 5-amino-4-imidazolecarboxamide riboside (AICA-riboside), on the basis of a positive Bratton-Marshall test, spectral analysis, and spiking with the authentic compound. AICA-riboside is the nucleoside corresponding to AICAR (AICA-ribotide, also termed ZMP), an intermediate of the de novo purine biosynthetic pathway. AICA-riboside is formed by dephosphorylation of AICAR, most likely by IMP-GMP 5-prime-nucleotidase. When Marie et al. (2004) incubated fibroblasts from their patient with AICA-riboside, they observed accumulation of AICAR not observed in control cells, suggesting impairment of the final steps of purine biosynthesis, catalyzed by the bifunctional enzyme AICAR transformylase/IMP cyclohydrolase (ATIC; 601731). AICAR transformylase was profoundly deficient, whereas the IMP cyclohydrolase level was 40% of normal. The presence of massive amounts of AICA-riboside in the patient's urine and the accumulation of AICAR and its derivatives in her erythrocytes and fibroblasts were taken by Marie et al. (2004) to be a clear indication of deficiency in the enzyme that utilizes this intermediate de novo purine biosynthesis, the bifunctional enzyme encoded by the ATIC gene. |
209850::Autism, the prototypic pervasive developmental disorder (PDD), is usually apparent by 3 years of age. It is characterized by a triad of limited or absent verbal communication, a lack of reciprocal social interaction or responsiveness, and restricted, stereotypic, and ritualized patterns of interests and behavior (Bailey et al., 1996; Risch et al., 1999). 'Autism spectrum disorder,' sometimes referred to as ASD, is a broader phenotype encompassing the less severe disorders Asperger syndrome (see ASPG1; 608638) and pervasive developmental disorder, not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS). 'Broad autism phenotype' includes individuals with some symptoms of autism, but who do not meet the full criteria for autism or other disorders. Mental retardation coexists in approximately two-thirds of individuals with ASD, except for Asperger syndrome, in which mental retardation is conspicuously absent (Jones et al., 2008). Genetic studies in autism often include family members with these less stringent diagnoses (Schellenberg et al., 2006). |Levy et al. (2009) provided a general review of autism and autism spectrum disorder, including epidemiology, characteristics of the disorder, diagnosis, neurobiologic hypotheses for the etiology, genetics, and treatment options. |Genetic Heterogeneity of Autism|Autism is considered to be a complex multifactorial disorder involving many genes. Accordingly, several loci have been identified, some or all of which may contribute to the phenotype. Included in this entry is AUTS1, which has been mapped to chromosome 7q22.|Other susceptibility loci include AUTS3 (608049), which maps to chromosome 13q14; AUTS4 (608636), which maps to chromosome 15q11; AUTS6 (609378), which maps to chromosome 17q11; AUTS7 (610676), which maps to chromosome 17q21; AUTS8 (607373), which maps to chromosome 3q25-q27; AUTS9 (611015), which maps to chromosome 7q31; AUTS10 (611016), which maps to chromosome 7q36; AUTS11 (610836), which maps to chromosome 1q41; AUTS12 (610838), which maps to chromosome 21p13-q11; AUTS13 (610908), which maps to chromosome 12q14; AUTS14A (611913), which has been found in patients with a deletion of a region of 16p11.2; AUTS14B (614671), which has been found in patients with a duplication of a region of 16p11.2; AUTS15 (612100), associated with mutation in the CNTNAP2 gene (604569) on chromosome 7q35-q36; AUTS16 (613410), associated with mutation in the SLC9A9 gene (608396) on chromosome 3q24; AUTS17 (613436), associated with mutation in the SHANK2 gene (603290) on chromosome 11q13; and AUTS18 (615032), associated with mutation in the CHD8 gene (610528). (NOTE: the symbol 'AUTS2' has been used to refer to a gene on chromosome 7q11 (KIAA0442; 607270) and therefore is not used as a part of this autism locus series.)|There are several X-linked forms of autism susceptibility: AUTSX1 (300425), associated with mutations in the NLGN3 gene (300336); AUTSX2 (300495), associated with mutations in NLGN4 (300427); AUTSX3 (300496), associated with mutations in MECP2 (300005); AUTSX4 (300830), associated with variation in the region on chromosome Xp22.11 containing the PTCHD1 gene (300828); AUTSX5 (300847), associated with mutations in the RPL10 gene (312173); and AUTSX6 (300872), associated with mutation in the TMLHE gene (300777).|A locus on chromosome 2q (606053) associated with a phenotype including intellectual disability and speech deficits was formerly designated AUTS5.|Folstein and Rosen-Sheidley (2001) reviewed the genetics of autism. |The DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) specifies several diagnostic criteria for autism. In general, patients with autism exhibit qualitative impairment in social interaction, as manifest by impairment in the use of nonverbal behaviors such as eye-to-eye gaze, facial expression, body postures, and gestures, failure to develop appropriate peer relationships, and lack of social sharing or reciprocity. Patients have impairments in communication, such as a delay in, or total lack of, the development of spoken language. In patients who do develop adequate speech, there remains a marked impairment in the ability to initiate or sustain a conversation, as well as stereotyped or idiosyncratic use of language. Patients also exhibit restricted, repetitive and stereotyped patterns of behavior, interests, and activities, including abnormal preoccupation with certain activities and inflexible adherence to routines or rituals.|In his pioneer description of infantile autism, Kanner (1943) defined the disorder as 'an innate inability to form the usual, biologically provided affective contact with people.' Kanner (1943) noted that in most cases the child's behavior was abnormal from early infancy, and he suggested the presence of an inborn, presumably genetic, defect.|In a review, Smalley (1997) stated that mental retardation is said to be present in approximately 75% of cases of autism, seizures in 15 to 30% of cases, and electroencephalographic abnormalities in 20 to 50% of cases. In addition, approximately 15 to 37% of cases of autism have a comorbid medical condition, including 5 to 14% with a known genetic disorder or chromosomal anomaly. The 4 most common associations include fragile X syndrome (300624), tuberous sclerosis (see 191100), 15q duplications (AUTS4; 608636), and untreated phenylketonuria (PKU; 261600). Significant associations at a phenotypic level may reflect disruptions in a common neurobiologic pathway, common susceptibility genes, or genes in linkage disequilibrium. |The autism spectrum disorder shows a striking sex bias, with a male:female ratio of idiopathic autism estimated at 4-10:1, and with an increase in this ratio as the intelligence of the affected individuals increases (Folstein and Rosen-Sheidley, 2001). |Lainhart et al. (2002) stated that approximately 20% of children with autism appear to have relatively normal development during the first 12 to 24 months of life. This period of relative normalcy gradually or suddenly ends and is followed by a period of regression, characterized most prominently by a significant loss of language skills, after which the full autism syndrome becomes evident. |Rarely, children with autism may exhibit hyperlexia, or precocious reading (238350). Among a group of 66 children with pervasive developmental disorder, Burd et al. (1985) identified 4 with hyperlexia.|Cohen et al. (2005) discussed several genetic disorders consistently associated with autism, including fragile X syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, Angelman syndrome (105830), Down syndrome (190685), Sanfilippo syndrome (252900), Rett syndrome (312750) and other MECP2-related disorders, phenylketonuria, Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS; 182290), 22q13 deletion syndrome (606232), Cohen syndrome (COH1; 216550), adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency (103050), and Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS; 270400). |Miles et al. (2008) presented an expert-derived consensus measure of dysmorphic features often observed in patients with autism. The goal was to enable clinicians not trained in dysmorphology to use this classification system to identify and further subphenotype patients with autism. The measure includes 12 body areas that can be scored to arrive at a determination of dysmorphic or nondysmorphic. The body areas include stature, hair growth pattern, ear structure and placement, nose size, facial structure, philtrum, mouth and lips, teeth, hands, fingers and thumbs, nails, and feet. The model performed with 81 to 82% sensitivity and 95 to 99% specificity. |Constantino et al. (2017) showed that variation in viewing of social scenes, including levels of preferential attention and the timing, direction, and targeting of individual eye movements, is strongly influenced by genetic factors, with effects directly traceable to the active seeking of social information. In a series of eye-tracking experiments conducted with 338 toddlers, including 166 epidemiologically ascertained twins (enrolled by representative sampling from the general population), 88 nontwins with autism, and 84 singleton controls, Constantino et al. (2017) found high monozygotic twin-twin concordance (0.91) and relatively low dizygotic concordance (0.35). Moreover, the most highly heritable characteristics, preferential attention to eye and mouth regions of the face, are also those that are differentially decreased in children with autism (chi squared = 64.03, p less than 0.0001). The results of Constantino et al. (2017) implicated social visual engagement as a neurodevelopmental endophenotype not only for autism, but also for populationwide variation in social information seeking. |
601313::Polycystin-1, encoded by the PKD1 gene, forms a complex with polycystin-2 (PKD2; 173910) that regulates multiple signaling pathways to maintain normal renal tubular structure and function (summary by Song et al., 2009). |
601678::antenatal Bartter syndrome type 1 (BARTS1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the sodium-potassium-chloride cotransporter-2 gene (SLC12A1; 600839) on chromosome 15q21.|Bartter syndrome refers to a group of disorders that are unified by autosomal recessive transmission of impaired salt reabsorption in the thick ascending loop of Henle with pronounced salt wasting, hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, and hypercalciuria. Clinical disease results from defective renal reabsorption of sodium chloride in the thick ascending limb (TAL) of the Henle loop, where 30% of filtered salt is normally reabsorbed (Simon et al., 1997). |Patients with antenatal forms of Bartter syndrome typically present with premature birth associated with polyhydramnios and low birth weight and may develop life-threatening dehydration in the neonatal period. Patients with classic Bartter syndrome (see BARTS3, 607364) present later in life and may be sporadically asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic (summary by Simon et al., 1996 and Fremont and Chan, 2012). |For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Bartter syndrome, see 607364.|The antenatal form of Bartter syndrome is a life-threatening disorder in which both renal tubular hypokalemic alkalosis and profound systemic symptoms are manifest (Seyberth et al., 1985; Deschenes et al., 1993; and Proesmans et al., 1985). The abnormalities begin in utero with marked fetal polyuria that leads to polyhydramnios between 24 and 30 weeks of gestation and, typically, premature delivery (Ohlsson et al., 1984). The amniotic fluid contains high chloride levels but normal concentrations of sodium, potassium, calcium, and prostaglandin E2. Affected neonates have severe salt wasting and hyposthenuria, moderate hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, hyperprostaglandinuria, and failure to thrive. The International Collaborative Study Group for Bartter-like Syndromes (1997) noted that an essential manifestation of the antenatal variant is marked hypercalciuria, and as a secondary consequence, affected infants develop nephrocalcinosis and osteopenia. Fever, vomiting, and occasional diarrhea associated with the disorder have been attributed to the stimulation of renal and systemic prostaglandin E2 activity in affected infants; these symptoms are effectively treated with inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis. Based on these clinical features, the antenatal form of Bartter syndrome has been referred to as the hyperprostaglandin E syndrome (Seyberth et al., 1987).|Kurtz et al. (1997) studied a cohort of 20 Costa Rican patients, previously described by Madrigal et al. (1997), who had a congenital syndrome that bore strong similarities to antenatal Bartter syndrome type 1 but also had several distinct features. In all patients, pregnancy was complicated by polyhydramnios, and 7 of the 9 patients were born prematurely. Six of 9 patients studied in detail were presented for evaluation within the first year of life. One was not diagnosed until the age of 10 years and another was 4.5 years old at the time of diagnosis. All affected children had experienced recurrent episodes of vomiting and dehydration, dating from the first few weeks of life. The phenotype was remarkable for a peculiar facies in 7 of 9 children, characterized by a triangularly shaped face, protruding ears, and drooping mouth; in addition, 5 of 9 had strabismus, and there was evidence of sensorineural hearing loss by audiogram testing in 2 of 9. All had hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, hyposthenuria, and failure to thrive, with growth parameters less than the 3rd centile for age. Hypercalciuria with associated sonographic evidence of nephrocalcinosis was demonstrated in 7 children. The other 2 children had evidence of nephrocalcinosis but normal urine calcium excretion. Renal function was well preserved in all but 1 patient, who developed renal insufficiency and progressed to end-stage renal disease by 16 years of age. Although the development of tubulointerstitial disease leading to a progressive decline in renal function had been described both in patients treated with long-term indomethacin and in patients with classic Bartter syndrome, this patient was not treated with indomethacin, and the etiology of her end-stage renal disease remained unexplained. Kurtz et al. (1997) noted that the Costa Rican patients had a milder clinical course than other antenatal Bartter syndrome patients with NKCC2 (SLC12A1) mutations. |Gross et al. (2015) reported a 5-month-old boy, born of consanguineous Arab Muslim parents with an unusual presentation of BARTS1. The delivery was complicated by polyhydramnios, and he was diagnosed with nephrocalcinosis in the neonatal period. After treatment with antibiotics for a febrile illness at age 3 months, he developed severe diarrhea with weight loss. Laboratory studies at age 5 months showed increased serum calcium, hypercalciuria, and hyperparathyroidism, but other electrolytes were normal. Specifically, he did not have hypokalemia or metabolic alkalosis. Head and neck ultrasound did not show a parathyroid adenoma. Treatment with potassium citrate was effective for the biochemical abnormalities, but he showed significant developmental delay with hypotonia at age 10 months. Gross et al. (2015) suggested that the abnormality in renal calcium homeostasis may have triggered changes in parathyroid hormone (PTH; 168450) secretion. Whole-exome sequencing identified a homozygous frameshift mutation in the SLC12A1 gene, confirming the diagnosis. |Li et al. (2016) reported 2 African American brothers with BARTS1 associated with hyperparathyroidism, hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and nephrocalcinosis. Both pregnancies were complicated by polyhydramnios and premature delivery. The proband's brother died of multiorgan failure at 9 weeks, and postmortem examination showed multigland parathyroid hyperplasia. The 12-year-old proband continued to have persistent hypercalciuria and increased PTH levels with normal bone density. Other electrolytes were only mildly disturbed: he had mildly low sodium, potassium, chloride, and magnesium, and mildly increased bicarbonate. Plasma renin, vasopressin, and urinary prostaglandin E2 were increased. He was treated with cinacalcet and potassium citrate. Neck ultrasound did not reveal a parathyroid adenoma. |Wongsaengsak et al. (2017) reported 4 patients from 3 unrelated families of Hispanic descent with genetically confirmed BARTS1 associated with hyperparathyroidism, hypercalcemia, nephrocalcinosis, and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. All had classic features of the disorder, including polyhydramnios and hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, and most had increased renin activity. Additional features included poor overall growth, failure to thrive, respiratory insufficiency, and gastroesophageal reflux. One patient was noted to have dysmorphic facial features with triangular facies and prominent forehead, and 2 were noted to have developmental delay. Treatment strategies included indomethacin, cinacalcet, potassium supplementation, and chlorothiazide, with variable responses. |
241200::antenatal Bartter syndrome type 2 (BARTS2) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the potassium channel ROMK gene (KCNJ1; 600359) on chromosome 11q24.|Bartter syndrome refers to a group of disorders that are unified by autosomal recessive transmission of impaired salt reabsorption in the thick ascending loop of Henle with pronounced salt wasting, hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, and hypercalciuria. Clinical disease results from defective renal reabsorption of sodium chloride in the thick ascending limb (TAL) of the Henle loop, where 30% of filtered salt is normally reabsorbed (Simon et al., 1997). |Patients with antenatal forms of Bartter syndrome typically present with premature birth associated with polyhydramnios and low birth weight and may develop life-threatening dehydration in the neonatal period. Patients with classic Bartter syndrome (see BARTS3, 607364) present later in life and may be sporadically asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic (summary by Simon et al., 1996 and Fremont and Chan, 2012). For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Bartter syndrome, see 607364.|The antenatal form of Bartter syndrome is a life-threatening disorder in which both renal tubular hypokalemic alkalosis and profound systemic symptoms are manifest (Seyberth et al., 1985; Deschenes et al., 1993; Proesmans et al., 1985). The abnormalities begin in utero with marked fetal polyuria that leads to polyhydramnios between 24 and 30 weeks of gestation and, typically, premature delivery (Ohlsson et al., 1984). The amniotic fluid contains high chloride levels but normal concentrations of sodium, potassium, calcium, and prostaglandin E2. Affected neonates have severe salt wasting and hyposthenuria, moderate hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, hyperprostaglandinuria, and failure to thrive. The International Collaborative Study Group for Bartter-like Syndromes (1997) noted that an essential manifestation of the antenatal variant is marked hypercalciuria, and as a secondary consequence, affected infants develop nephrocalcinosis and osteopenia. |Peters et al. (2002) found that 9 of 14 patients with antenatal Bartter syndrome caused by mutations in the ROMK gene developed transient hyperkalemia within the first month of life, which was in contrast to those patients with NKCC2 mutations. The phenotype in the ROMK patients resembled the clinical picture of pseudohypoaldosteronism type I (264350). Finer et al. (2003) reported 12 infants with mutations in the ROMK gene, affecting all 3 protein isoforms, who showed transient hyperkalemia as high as 9.0 mmol/L without acidosis within the first few weeks of life. Two patients developed ventricular arrhythmias and 1 patient died while hyperkalemic at age 8 days. The authors suggested that postnatal maturation of potassium-regulating mechanisms, including Na-K-ATPase, may explain the transient nature of the hyperkalemia. By functional analysis of channel conductance defects caused by different ROMK mutations, Jeck et al. (2001) suggested that patients with mutations that affect all 3 ROMK isoforms may show transient neonatal hyperkalemia, most likely due to defects affecting the cortical collecting duct. |Fever, vomiting, and occasional diarrhea associated with the antenatal Bartter syndrome have been attributed to the stimulation of renal and systemic prostaglandin E2 activity in affected infants; these symptoms are effectively treated with inhibitors of prostaglandin synthesis. Based on these clinical features, the antenatal form of Bartter syndrome has been referred to as the hyperprostaglandin E syndrome (Seyberth et al., 1987). |Fellman et al. (1996) described an infant with severe hyperprostaglandin E syndrome in whom hyperthyroidism was diagnosed at the age of 12 weeks. The hyperthyroidism was thought to have been induced by PGE2. The PGE2 stimulus was also thought to explain the recurrent acute crises of polyuria, dehydration, fever, and diarrhea in this patient. They considered the extensive and abnormal crying of the patient to be an indicator of pain caused by endogenous PGE2, since it could be abolished with indomethacin or a very high dose of fentanyl. |There may be a form of hyperprostaglandin E syndrome that is separate from the antenatal Bartter syndrome due to mutation of the SLC12A1 or KCNJ1 gene. Kockerling et al. (1996) stated that hyperprostaglandin E syndrome is characterized by its severe prenatal manifestation, leading to fetal polyuria, development of polyhydramnios, and premature birth. The disorder mimics furosemide treatment with hypokalemic alkalosis, hypochloremia, isosthenuria, and impaired renal conservation of both calcium and magnesium. Therefore, the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle seems to be involved in the disorder. Kockerling et al. (1996) demonstrated that sensitivity to furosemide is completely maintained in patients with Bartter syndrome and Gitelman syndrome. The diuretic, saluretic, and hormonal responses were similar to those of the control group of healthy children, indicating an intact function of the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle in BS/GS. In contrast, however, patients with hyperprostaglandin E syndrome had a marked resistance to this loop diuretic. The authors concluded that a defect in electrolyte reabsorption in the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle plays a major role in hyperprostaglandin E syndrome. |
607364::classic Bartter syndrome type 3 (BARTS3) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the kidney chloride channel B gene (CLCNKB; 602023) on chromosome 1p36.|Bartter syndrome refers to a group of disorders that are unified by autosomal recessive transmission of impaired salt reabsorption in the thick ascending loop of Henle with pronounced salt wasting, hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, and hypercalciuria. Clinical disease results from defective renal reabsorption of sodium chloride in the thick ascending limb (TAL) of the Henle loop, where 30% of filtered salt is normally reabsorbed (Simon et al., 1997). |Patients with antenatal (or neonatal) forms of Bartter syndrome (e.g., BARTS1, 601678) typically present with premature birth associated with polyhydramnios and low birth weight and may develop life-threatening dehydration in the neonatal period. Patients with classic Bartter syndrome present later in life and may be sporadically asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic (summary by Simon et al., 1996 and Fremont and Chan, 2012). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Bartter Syndrome|Antenatal Bartter syndrome type 1 (601678) is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the butmetanide-sensitive Na-K-2Cl cotransporter NKCC2 (SLC12A1; 600839). Antenatal Bartter syndrome type 2 (241200) is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the ATP-sensitive potassium channel ROMK (KCNJ1; 600359). One form of neonatal Bartter syndrome with sensorineural deafness, Bartter syndrome type 4A (602522), is caused by mutation in the BSND gene (606412). Another form of neonatal Bartter syndrome with sensorineural deafness, Bartter syndrome type 4B (613090), is caused by simultaneous mutation in both the CLCNKA (602024) and CLCNKB (602023) genes.|Also see autosomal dominant hypocalcemia-1 with Bartter syndrome (601198), which is sometimes referred to as Bartter syndrome type 5 (Fremont and Chan, 2012), caused by mutation in the CASR gene (601199). |See Gitelman syndrome (GTLMN; 263800), which is often referred to as a mild variant of Bartter syndrome, caused by mutation in the thiazide-sensitive sodium-chloride cotransporter SLC12A3 (600968).|Bartter syndrome (Bartter et al., 1962) is an unusual form of secondary hyperaldosteronism in which hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the juxtaglomerular cells are associated with normal blood pressure and hypokalemic alkalosis in the absence of edema. The primary defect resides in active chloride reabsorption in the loop of Henle. The features are short stature, hyperactive renin-angiotensin system, lack of effect of angiotensin on blood pressure, renal potassium wasting, increased renal prostaglandin production, and occasionally hypomagnesemia. |Arant et al. (1970) reported 2 brothers with features of Bartter syndrome but with severe azotemia at the onset and in one of them renal osteodystrophy. Renal biopsy showed only mild hyperplasia of juxtaglomerular cells and severe glomerulonephritis. Most of the patients have shown retardation of growth and mental development, but the patient of Tarm et al. (1973) represented an exception. Erkelens and Statius van Eps (1973) described a patient with erythrocytosis in addition to the Bartter syndrome. They interpreted this as evidence that both renin and erythropoietin are produced in the juxtaglomerular apparatus. Dillon et al. (1979) studied 10 affected children, 2 of whom were sibs. Severity varied widely. Ages varied from 3 months to 15 years; sex distribution was equal. Hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, rickets, and urine acidification defects were seen in some patients. Indomethacin effected remarkable clinical and biochemical improvement. Simopoulos (1979) observed a delayed growth spurt in Bartter syndrome resulting in attainment of normal stature. Two-thirds of the children have some degree of mental retardation. |The relation of the disorder reported by De Jong et al. (1980) to the Bartter syndrome was unclear. They studied an adult brother and sister with hyperaldosteronism and hyperkalemia who differed from cases of Bartter syndrome in the presence of hypertension. Response to indomethacin suggested excessive prostaglandin production which may have been primary. The sibs also showed tachycardia. |Ramos et al. (1980) demonstrated that the Bartter syndrome can be simulated by habitual vomiting, as in anorexia nervosa. Renal biopsy showed hyperplasia of the juxtaglomerular apparatus. Hyperkalemic alkalosis, normotensive hyperreninism, hyperaldosteronism, increased levels of urinary and plasma prostaglandin E (PGE), and vascular hyporesponsivity to angiotensin II were features identical to those of idiopathic Bartter syndrome, but unlike that disorder the patient showed low urinary chloride and no increase in the fractional chloride clearance. Any process that leads to hypokalemia can result in the Bartter syndrome. Wolfsdorf and Senior (1980) reported pseudo-Bartter syndrome in 2 infants fed exclusively with soybean-based formula which as a result of a manufacturing error was severely deficient in chloride. |In studies of 3 sibs, a boy and 2 girls aged 17, 11, and 18 years, Stoff et al. (1980) found a defect in platelet aggregation. They suggested that this may be caused by an increase in plasma cAMP resulting from excessive prostaglandins. Increased renal synthesis of these long chain fatty acids is presumably responsible for many features of the syndrome: vascular insensitivity, impaired urinary concentrating ability, and obligatory renal sodium loss. O'Regan et al. (1979) had demonstrated that presumed obligatory heterozygotes (parents) have impairment of epinephrine-induced platelet aggregation, thought to reflect an abnormality of prostaglandin metabolism. Furthermore, a circulating inhibitor of platelet aggregation, probably a prostaglandin, was found. The inhibition of platelet aggregation was aggravated by salt depletion (Stoff et al., 1980) although renal features improved. Baehler et al. (1980) reported a 43-year-old man with Bartter syndrome who had suffered from generalized weakness, muscle cramps, and chest pain since his teens, with aggravation of these symptoms in the previous 6 months. Family information was not provided. |Kurtz et al. (1981) described a family in which 5 of 9 sibs (aged 20 to 30 years) had bilateral nephrocalcinosis, hypercalciuria, chronic chloride-resistant renal metabolic alkalosis, and hypokalemia due to renal wasting. Creatinine clearance was little reduced. Plasma renin activity and urinary aldosterone excretion were abnormally high. Blood pressure was normal. No defect in the loop of Henle could be demonstrated. No further information and no definitive report was available (Sebastian, 1989). Ruvalcaba and Martinez (1992) described 3 sibs with a combination of isolated growth hormone deficiency and Bartter syndrome. The mother had short stature with growth hormone deficiency. Other members of the kindred had average stature. All the patients were normotensive. Treatment of the 2 youngest sibs with growth hormone in addition to potassium and magnesium resulted in greater than doubled growth velocity. Smilde et al. (1994) described a family in which 7 members had hypokalemic alkalosis with hypomagnesemia and hyperreninemic hyperaldosteronism. Also, as a major symptom, they had chondrocalcinosis, a known complication of Bartter syndrome. The proband was a female who presented at age 39 with acute attacks of arthritis and was found to have chondrocalcinosis of several joints. The metabolic changes of Bartter syndrome were found 15 years later and a decreased serum magnesium was found at the age of 61. Magnesium therapy was instituted at that time and over a period of 10 years a significant reduction of the calcifications was noted. Calcium pyrophosphate crystals were demonstrated in synovial fluid of the knee by polarized microscopy. In addition, 3 brothers out of a total of 9 sibs were also affected, as were a daughter and 2 sons of the proband. Symptomatic involvement of the symphysis pubis by the chondrocalcinosis was a feature in this family. The pattern of inheritance is consistent with autosomal recessive transmission if the proband were married to a heterozygote; none of the 16 children of her 3 affected brothers was affected. In all of the patients, urinary magnesium excretion was inappropriately high and urinary calcium excretion inappropriately low. Chondrocalcinosis by itself is usually an autosomal dominant (118600); combined potassium and magnesium wasting (263800) is an autosomal recessive disorder. |Simon et al. (1997) reported 17 kindreds with Bartter syndrome type 3, confirmed by genetic analysis. A review of index cases from each kindred showed that all had spontaneous hypokalemia (serum K+ levels as low as 1.1), all had elevation of serum bicarbonate, and all had evidence of salt-wasting. Age at presentation ranged from birth to 16 years. Six studied patients had elevation of serum renin and aldosterone. The fractional reabsorption of chloride in the TAL is normally 80 to 95%; in the index patients from 2 families, the fractional chloride reabsorption was profoundly depressed at 24% and 25%, respectively, indicating a striking defect in chloride reabsorption in the TAL. Hypercalciuria was present in 11 of 17 index cases, while 6 had calcium values in the normal range. The clinical picture in the cases described by Simon et al. (1997) varied in severity from near-fatal volume depletion with hypokalemic alkalosis and respiratory arrest or requirement for massive intravenous potassium replacement to very mild disease presenting with only polyuria and weakness at age 16. Even among patients with homozygous deletions, age at presentation and clinical severity were highly variable. A feature that distinguished the disorder clearly from other forms of Bartter syndrome was the absence of renal calcification (nephrocalcinosis) in all examined patients. |Fukuyama et al. (2004) reported 2 Japanese patients who suffered from clinically diagnosed classic Bartter syndrome but who had hypocalciuria. Hypocalciuria is believed to be a pathognomic finding of Na-Cl cotransporter malfunction. Two mutations in the CLCNKB gene were found (602023.0009, 602023.0010). The authors concluded that some CLCNKB mutations may affect calcium handling in renal tubular cells. |Sun et al. (2005) reported a patient with classic Bartter syndrome who had bilateral sclerochoroidal calcification. Optical coherence tomography showed normal retina and retinal pigment epithelium overlying the choroidal lesions. The patient had persistent hypomagnesemia and normocalcemia for 26 years despite magnesium supplementary treatment. The authors suggested that hypomagnesemia may have a pathogenic role in the development of sclerochoroidal calcification in this disorder. |
602522::neonatal Bartter syndrome type 4A with sensorineural deafness (BARTS4A) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the BSND gene (606412) on chromosome 1p32.|Bartter syndrome refers to a group of disorders that are unified by autosomal recessive transmission of impaired salt reabsorption in the thick ascending loop of Henle with pronounced salt wasting, hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, and hypercalciuria. Clinical disease results from defective renal reabsorption of sodium chloride in the thick ascending limb (TAL) of the Henle loop, where 30% of filtered salt is normally reabsorbed (Simon et al., 1997). |Patients with antenatal (or neonatal) forms of Bartter syndrome typically present with premature birth associated with polyhydramnios and low birth weight and may develop life-threatening dehydration in the neonatal period. Patients with classic Bartter syndrome (see BARTS3, 607364) present later in life and may be sporadically asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic (summary by Simon et al., 1996 and Fremont and Chan, 2012). For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Bartter syndrome, see 607364.|Seyberth et al. (1985) described an infantile variant of Bartter syndrome. that was usually associated with maternal polyhydramnios, premature birth, postnatal polyuria and hypokalemic hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis, and a typical appearance. Some of the infants with the infantile variant of Bartter syndrome had been described as having a prominent forehead, triangular facies with drooping mouth, and large eyes and pinnae. In 5 children of an extended consanguineous Bedouin family, Landau et al. (1995) observed the combination of the infantile variant of Bartter syndrome and sensorineural deafness. In 3 of the cases, the typical electrolyte imbalance and facial appearance were detected neonatally. Deafness was detected as early as age 1 month. Shalev et al. (2003) evaluated 13 affected members of the family described by Landau et al. (1995). Most did not have persistent hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis nor was early renal function deterioration uniformly present. |Jeck et al. (2001) reported clinical findings in 8 patients from 6 consanguineous families with hypokalemic salt-losing tubulopathy showing linkage to 1p31. Clinical presentation was homogeneous and included premature birth attributable to polyhydramnios, severe renal salt loss, stimulation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis, hypokalemic alkalosis, and hyperprostaglandin E-uria. Patients later developed potassium-wasting, inability to concentrate the urine, and chronic renal failure. All patients showed severe muscle hypotonia, motor retardation, and complete sensorineural hearing loss. Response to indomethacin was poor. |Miyamura et al. (2003) reported a Japanese man who was born of consanguineous parents and had congenital sensorineural deafness but was not diagnosed with Bartter syndrome until age 28 years, when he presented with fatigue, numbness and weakness in both legs, and polydipsia. Characteristic features such as maternal polyhydramnios, premature labor, or severe salt loss in the neonatal period were not present in this patient, although he reportedly had polydipsia with polyuria in childhood. On examination, he had a peculiar facies similar to that reported in Costa Rican children with antenatal-onset Bartter syndrome (601678), characterized by a triangularly shaped face, protruding ears, and drooping mouth (Madrigal et al., 1997). Plasma renin activity, aldosterone, angiotensin II, and vasopressin levels were elevated, and he had impaired urine-concentrating ability. A routine abdominal x-ray showed nephrocalcinosis, although he did not have hypercalciuria or a history of renal calculi. Neither parent manifested any clinical symptoms of Bartter syndrome, and audiograms revealed moderate hearing loss consistent with their age. Miyamura et al. (2003) stated that this was the first case report of Bartter syndrome from Japan. |
613090::neonatal Bartter syndrome type 4B with sensorineural deafness (BARTS4B) is caused by simultaneous mutation in both the CLCNKA (602024) and CLCNKB (602023) genes.|Bartter syndrome refers to a group of disorders that are unified by autosomal recessive transmission of impaired salt reabsorption in the thick ascending loop of Henle with pronounced salt wasting, hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, and hypercalciuria. Clinical disease results from defective renal reabsorption of sodium chloride in the thick ascending limb (TAL) of the Henle loop, where 30% of filtered salt is normally reabsorbed (Simon et al., 1997). Patients with antenatal (or neonatal) forms of Bartter syndrome (e.g., BARTS1, 601678) typically present with premature birth associated with polyhydramnios and low birth weight and may develop life-threatening dehydration in the neonatal period. Patients with classic Bartter syndrome present later in life and may be sporadically asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic (summary by Simon et al., 1996 and Fremont and Chan, 2012). For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Bartter syndrome, see 607364.|
300971::transient antenatal Bartter syndrome-5 (BARTS5) is caused by mutation in the MAGED2 gene (300470) on chromosome Xp11.|For a discussion of phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity of Bartter syndrome, see 607364.|Antenatal Bartter syndrome is a potentially life-threatening disease characterized by fetal polyuria, polyhydramnios, prematurity, and postnatal polyuria with persistent renal salt wasting. In transient antenatal Bartter syndrome-5, the onset of polyhydramnios and labor occur several weeks earlier than in other forms of Bartter syndrome. Polyuria lasts from a few days to 6 weeks, ending around 30 to 33 weeks of gestational age. Other features in the neonatal period include hypercalciuria, causing nephrocalcinosis in some cases, as well as hyponatremia, hypokalemia, and elevated renin and aldosterone; these subsequently resolve or normalize, although nephrocalcinosis may persist (Laghmani et al., 2016). |Engels et al. (1991) described 2 male preterm sibs, born at 31 to 33 weeks' gestation, who had peripartum asphyxia due to excessive polyhydramnios. Both infants exhibited polyuria with excessive loss of sodium and potassium, as well as hypercalciuria. In addition, they had hyperreninemia and hyperaldosteronism due to increased renal excretion of prostaglandin E2. In the third week of life, the renal losses decreased, and by the fourth week, fluid and salt replacement was no longer necessary. The brothers showed satisfactory growth, and the older boy had no renal dysfunction at age 4 years. Engels et al. (1991) suggested that this represented a familial transient congenital tubulopathy, noting that polyhydramnios, hypercalciuria, and increased excretion of prostaglandin E2 were consistent with a variant of 'hyperprostaglandin-E2 syndrome' (Bartter syndrome).|Reinalter et al. (1998) reported a 6-year-old Flemish boy who was born after a pregnancy complicated by severe polyhydramnios at a gestational age of 28 weeks. Analysis of the amniotic fluid showed a high chloride content. At birth, the proband displayed extreme polyuria, severe renal sodium and chloride loss, and marked hypercalciuria. He also required intubation and artificial ventilation for 6 days due to slow lung drainage. Five weeks after birth, his sodium chloride loss became renal potassium loss, along with a marked decrease in urine output. Fractional distal chloride reabsorption was 41%, approximately half of the normal range. He was discharged at 11 weeks of age with oral supplements of sodium chloride and potassium gluconate, and with fluid intake of 500 cc/day. At age 3 years, weight and height were at the 50th percentile and his medication was discontinued. He had a fractional distal chloride reabsorption of 44%, but no other features of Bartter syndrome were detected. Upon follow-up at 6 years of age, the boy had no hypokalemic alkalosis, no polyuria, and no hypercalciuria, and growth and development were normal. Renal ultrasound showed normal-sized kidneys with no nephrocalcinosis. Family history revealed that mother's first pregnancy also had been complicated by polyhydramnios, resulting in premature delivery at 25 weeks' gestation of a male infant who died at 7 hours of life. |Laghmani et al. (2016) reported a family in which the mother's first pregnancy was complicated by severe polyhydramnios at 19 weeks' gestation and preterm delivery of a stillborn male at 22 weeks. Two subsequent pregnancies with female fetuses were uneventful. Her fourth pregnancy was again complicated by early-onset severe polyhydramnios, followed by delivery at 27 weeks. The male infant immediately developed progressive polyuria with salt loss requiring intravenous fluid infusion. He also had severe hypercalciurua that caused medullary nephrocalcinosis. Clinical symptoms disappeared at 3 to 4 weeks of life, and he was treated with supplemental electrolytes and indomethacin for 1 year. At 17 years of age, he showed no clinical signs of renal salt loss and had normal urinary concentrating and diluting capacities. The proband's sister developed early-onset severe polyhydramnios during her first pregnancy, and gave birth to a preterm male infant at 31 weeks' gestation. Again neonatal polyuria was observed, which normalized within 1 week. Follow-up at 2 years of age showed that the boy had normal tubular and glomerular function. |
130650::Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) can be caused by mutation or deletion of imprinted genes within the chromosome 11p15.5 region. Specific genes involved include p57(KIP2) (CDKN1C; 600856), H19 (103280), and LIT1 (KCNQ1OT1; 604115). Hypermethylation and variation in the H19/IGF2-imprinting control region (ICR1; 616186) on chromosome 11p15.5, which regulates imprinted expression of H19 and IGF2 (147470), is also associated with BWS.|See also Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS; 180860), which is caused by hypomethylation defects at 11p15.|Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome is a pediatric overgrowth disorder involving a predisposition to tumor development. The clinical presentation is highly variable; some cases lack the hallmark features of exomphalos, macroglossia, and gigantism as originally described by Beckwith (1969) and Wiedemann (1969) (summary by Weksberg et al., 2010). |Mussa et al. (2016) provided a review of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, including the wide spectrum of phenotypic manifestations, delineation of the frequencies of manifestations according to genotype, and discussion of the molecular and epigenetic defects that underlie the disorder. |Individuals with BWS may grow at an increased rate during the latter half of pregnancy and in the first few years of life, but adult heights are generally in the normal range. Abnormal growth may also manifest as hemihypertrophy and/or macroglossia. Hypoglycemia is reported in 30 to 50% of babies with BWS. There is an increased frequency of malformations and medical complications, including abdominal wall defects (omphalocele, umbilical hernia, and diastasis recti) and visceromegaly involving liver, spleen, pancreas, kidneys, or adrenals. Fetal adrenocortical cytomegaly is a pathognomonic finding. Renal anomalies may include primary malformations, renal medullary dysplasia, nephrocalcinosis, and nephrolithiasis. There is a predisposition to embryonal malignancies, with Wilms tumor and hepatoblastoma the most common (review by Weksberg et al., 2010). |Irving (1967, 1970) initially described the 'typical linear indentations of the lobe' that have become one of the diagnostic criteria, also well documented by Best and Hoekstra (1981). Peculiar posterior helical ear pits were first described in the BWS by Kosseff et al. (1972) and later by many others (see Best, 1991). |Two reported patients had hearing loss due to fixation of the stapes (Paulsen, 1973 and Daugbjerg and Everberg, 1984). In 3 patients, BWS and type III polycystic kidney disease occurred simultaneously (Mulvihill et al., 1989). An adult woman developed a progressive virilization due to her androgen-secreting adrenal carcinoma (Clouston et al., 1989). |A review of 31 patients with BWS and malignant tumors showed that 18 had Wilms tumor (Sotelo-Avila et al., 1980). Wiedemann (1983) reported that of 388 children, 29 developed 32 neoplasms. Of these tumors, 26 were intraabdominal, 14 being Wilms tumors and 5 adrenocortical carcinoma. Hemihypertrophy, partial or complete, was noted in 12.5% of the cases but in more than 49% of the children with neoplasms. |Wiedemann (1989) commented on overgrowth of the external genitalia in both males and females with BWS. Sippell et al. (1989) reported longitudinal data on height, bone maturation, weight, and pubertal development in 7 children with BWS. The children reached an average height of 2.5 SD above the mean at or after puberty. Growth velocity was above the ninetieth percentile until 4 to 6 years of age, and normal thereafter. Bone age was significantly advanced in all patients studied. One of the patients had latent hypothyroidism. The association of BWS and thyroid disorders may be more than coincidental (Leung, 1985 and Leung and McArthur, 1989). Emery et al. (1983) reported 2 affected sibs, one with thoracic neuroblastoma and the other who died at age 2 months of cardiomyopathy and respiratory failure. |A 'new' aspect of the natural history of BWS was reported by Chitayat et al. (1990) who observed 2 infants who were apparently normal at birth but later developed characteristics of the disorder. Both had hypoglycemia neonatally and gradually developed coarse facial changes, umbilical hernia, and macroglossia. Renal sonography done after the macroglossia developed showed large kidneys in both. The placenta was carefully examined in each case but findings described as typical of BWS were found only in one. Chitayat et al. (1990) postulated that the cellular hyperplasia and hypertrophy characteristic of BWS is caused by persistent rests of embryonal cells that secrete paracrine and/or endocrine growth factors and that the effects may not become evident until postnatal life. Neuroblastoma is another form of embryonal neoplasm that occurs in BWS (Chitayat et al., 1990). Falik-Borenstein et al. (1991) described an affected infant with congenital gastric teratoma. |In a study of 53 affected children, Carlin et al. (1990) suggested that this disorder may be milder in many cases than one would guess from published descriptions. In 11 families (21%), more than one child had BWS, including 2 sets of twins, one monozygotic and one dizygotic. Additionally, 24 families had one or sometimes both parents, and/or other relatives, affected with one or more signs of BWS. They suggested that hemihypertrophy is an underappreciated diagnostic clue for BWS in the relatives of probands. Knight et al. (1980) and Watanabe and Yamanaka (1990) described prune belly syndrome (100100) in association with BWS. |Mental retardation was documented in 6 of 39 cases observed by Martinez-y-Martinez et al. (1992), one being related to neonatal hypoglycemia. |Elliott et al. (1994) observed 76 patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. The criteria for diagnosis were the presence of 3 major findings (macroglossia, pre- or postnatal growth greater than the 90th centile, and abdominal wall defects) or 2 major findings plus minor manifestations. In this preselected group, macroglossia was found in 97% of the patients, overgrowth in 88%, and abdominal wall defects in 80%. Hypoglycemia occurred in 48 patients and neoplasias in 3. Intellectual development was normal in all. Congenital heart defects were reported in 5 patients. Three patients had postaxial polydactyly of the foot. In one family, the mother of the index case had an ear pit and macroglossia as a child. In one family, 2 first cousins were affected. In 2 other families, 2 sibs were affected. Of 68 apparently sporadic cases, 15 had a relative with minor features of the syndrome. Elliott et al. (1994) suggested that incomplete penetrance may lead to underdiagnosis of familial cases. |Weng et al. (1995) reported the results of a follow-up study on 15 patients with WBS. They found that the pregnancies in these cases tended to have polyhydramnios with large placentas that were almost twice the normal placental weight. The large fetal size and polyhydramnios often resulted in early delivery with occasional perinatal mortality (observed in 3 cases). Excessive umbilical cord length was a manifestation of the increased placental size and was a useful sign in suspecting WBS before delivery. Abdominal wall defects and/or macroglossia helped confirm the diagnosis at birth. The newborn patients were almost 2 standard deviations above the expected mean length and weight for gestational age. The trend to increased size continued through early childhood and became less dramatic with increasing age. No cytogenetic abnormality was detected in 9 patients studied and the only tumor detected was a gastric teratoma evident in one infant at birth. Four of 15 patients had surgery for macroglossia. The findings were compared with those of Pettenati et al. (1986), who studied 22 patients. |Drut and Drut (1996) studied affected members of a family in which 4 members had WBS as a result of trisomy 11p15. Clinical examination showed nonimmune hydrops and placentomegaly in 2 sibs and multiple phenotypic abnormalities consistent with WBS in the 2 other relatives. |Moore et al. (2000) performed craniofacial anthropometric analyses on 19 patients with BWS and their relatives. The authors concluded that a unique, though variable, pattern of facial morphology can be defined in this syndrome, and that this phenotype does not diminish with age. |Everman et al. (2000) conducted a retrospective study that compared the serial alpha-fetoprotein (AFP; 104150) concentrations from 22 children with BWS with levels established for healthy children. The AFP concentration was greater with BWS and declined during the postnatal period at a significantly slower rate than what had been reported in healthy children. AFP levels obtained in the course of routine tumor screening in children with BWS should be interpreted with a normal curve established specifically for BWS rather than with previously published data for healthy infants and children. |Reddy et al. (1972) described a cardiac hamartoma in a 2-year-old child with BWS. Williams et al. (1990) found hamartoma of the urinary bladder in an infant with BWS. Jonas and Kimonis (2001) described a girl with a left chest wall hamartoma, macroglossia, nevus flammeus of the middle forehead, and a small umbilical hernia who developed left lower limb hemihypertrophy by 1 year of age and was presumed to have BWS. |Poole et al. (2012) reported 2 brothers with classic BWS. Both had very high birth weight (greater than 99th percentile), macroglossia requiring surgical correction, undescended testes, diastasis recti, and neonatal hypoglycemia. The older brother had large kidneys with unilateral cysts, a minor right-sided ear anomaly, and attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder. At age 24 years, he had a large head, prominent supraorbital ridges, a large mouth, and large hands and feet. The younger brother had mild right-sided hemihypertrophy and generalized joint hypermobility. He developed a Wilms tumor and needed special education. Puberty was delayed. |
600082::Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) refers to the nonmalignant growth of the prostate gland, and is histologically defined as hyperplasia of the prostate gland. BPH is an age-related phenomenon in men beginning at about age 40 years. BPH may result in prostatic enlargement and clinical symptoms most commonly affecting the lower urinary tract. These symptoms may be obstructive, including hesitancy, weak flow, and urinary retention, or irritative, including increased frequency and urgency. However, not all men with histologic BPH will develop prostatic enlargement or urinary symptoms (review by Roehrborn, 2005). |
203750::alpha-methylacetoacetic aciduria is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase-1 gene (ACAT1; 607809) on chromosome 11q22.|Alpha-methylacetoacetic aciduria, also known as 3-ketothiolase deficiency, is an inborn error of isoleucine catabolism characterized by urinary excretion of 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyric acid, 2-methylacetoacetic acid, tiglylglycine, and 2-butanone.|Daum et al. (1971) first described this disorder of the sixth step in the catabolism of isoleucine, that for the conversion of alpha-methylacetoacetate to propionate in a Dutch and a Chilean family. As in many of the other inborn errors of branched-chain amino acid catabolism, the presenting clinical feature was recurrent severe metabolic acidosis. Both parents and a sib had increased amounts of alpha-methyl-beta-hydroxybutyric acid in the urine, and this was increased by administration of isoleucine. The proband also showed excessive alpha-methylacetoacetate in the urine. A follow-up of the probands by Fukao et al. (1993) showed normal somatic and neuropsychologic development with no recurrence of acute metabolic decompensation. |Hillman and Keating (1974) described a female patient with the 'ketotic hyperglycinemia syndrome' (see 606054 and 251000) and normal propionate and methylmalonate metabolism but markedly impaired catabolism of isoleucine. Studies of her urine and cultured fibroblasts suggested a defect in the beta-ketothiolase reaction which cleaves alpha-methylacetoacetyl CoA to propionyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA. The authors suggested that this was another potentially treatable condition of young infants with vomiting and acidosis. Their patient was more severely affected than those reported by Daum et al. (1973). |Sewell et al. (1998) described a pregnancy in a 25-year-old woman in whom the diagnosis of MAT deficiency had been made at the age of 8 years. She presented at 32 weeks of gestation, having taken no medication other than oral iodine and iron supplements. Physical examination and routine laboratory tests were normal. Urinary organic acid analysis demonstrated a constantly elevated excretion of 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyrate. She was begun on carnitine supplementation. She delivered a clinically normal infant by cesarean section because of cephalopelvic disproportion. At the time of report, the baby was 2 years old and had developed normally. |Mrazova et al. (2005) reported a patient with T2 deficiency confirmed by genetic analysis. He presented at age 21 months with loss of consciousness after a short period of lethargy and vomiting following all-day fasting. Laboratory studies showed severe metabolic acidosis, hypoglycemia, ketonuria, hyperuricerima, and abnormal liver function tests. Organic acid profiling and enzymatic analysis indicated acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase deficiency. At age 4.5 years, he showed normal development after following a dietary regime with limited protein and lipid intake and frequent feeding. |
248510::beta-mannosidosis (MANSB) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding beta-mannosidase (MANBA; 609489) on chromosome 4q.|Beta-mannosidosis is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease of glycoprotein catabolism caused by a deficiency of lysosomal beta-mannosidase activity. The most severely affected patients show developmental delay and mental retardation, but there are differing levels of severity and some patients may have comparatively mild disease (Bedilu et al., 2002) The disorder was first described in goats (Jones and Dawson, 1981), who have a more severe neurodegenerative disorder than that seen in humans. |Wenger et al. (1986) described a 46-month-old boy with a severe deficiency in beta-mannosidase activity, whose parents had an intermediate level of enzyme consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance. Beta-mannosidase activity levels near zero were found in all available samples from the patient, including leukocytes, plasma, and cultured skin fibroblasts. In addition to the deficiency of beta-mannosidase, this patient also had a low level of heparin sulfamidase activity in cultured skin fibroblasts. The patient's urine contained excess disaccharide that was identified as mannosyl(1-4)-N-acetylglucosamine and heparan sulfate. The patient showed coarsening facial features, mild bone disease, delayed speech development, hyperactivity, and mental retardation. Many of the findings resembled those found to have defects in the catabolism of the oligosaccharide chains of glycoproteins such as fucosidosis (230000), sialidosis (256550), and aspartylglucosaminuria (208400). The deficiency of heparin sulfamidase and the excess of heparan sulfate in the urine, both findings consistent with Sanfilippo syndrome type A (252900), suggested the presence of 2 disorders. Hu et al. (1990) used complementation studies to show that the patient reported by Wenger et al. (1986) had both Sanfilippo syndrome and beta-mannosidosis. |Cooper et al. (1986) reported an Indian-Hindu man with beta-mannosidosis; his parents were not related. Intellectual impairment was first observed when the patient began to attend school. Clinical assessment at the age of 44 years showed mental retardation but no other neurologic signs; CT scan of the brain was normal. The patient had angiokeratomas on the scrotum and the shaft of the penis and marked tortuosity of conjunctival vessels. He did not have facial dysmorphism, hepatosplenomegaly, or radiologic changes of the bones. The urine was free of albumin, red cells, and casts. The patient's 19-year-old mentally retarded brother had similar skin lesions. Both brothers had deficiency of beta-mannosidase, and the parents had intermediate levels. Cooper et al. (1988) found markedly decreased beta-mannosidase activity in plasma, white cells, fibroblasts, and urine obtained from the 2 affected Indian brothers (the younger brother was stated to be 29 years old); all other lysosomal enzymes measured, including sulfamidase, showed normal activity. Biopsy of a skin lesion from the 'bathing trunk' area showed marked cytoplasmic vacuolization. Urinary mucopolysaccharide excretion was normal, but thin-layer chromatography of urinary oligosaccharides showed an abnormal band shown to be a disaccharide. Cooper et al. (1988) noted that the difference in storage material in the caprine disease may account for the clinical differences; a trisaccharide accumulates in the goat. |By analyzing urinary oligosaccharides and by measuring enzyme activity in leukocytes and plasma, Dorland et al. (1988) diagnosed beta-mannosidosis in 2 sons of a first-cousin Turkish couple. Behavioral abnormalities and deafness with speech retardation were the main clinical features. Kleijer et al. (1990) reported 2 affected sibs from a Czech Gypsy family with beta-mannosidosis. The girl was severely affected; an older brother had milder manifestations. Heterozygous levels of beta-mannosidase were found in the fibroblasts and/or plasma of the parents and a sister. Cooper et al. (1991) reported a female infant with severe beta-mannosidosis. She had no dysmorphic features except brachycephaly. She showed moderate developmental delay, developed refractive seizures at age 12 months, and died at age 15 months. Urinary analysis showed mannose disaccharides. |Poenaru et al. (1992) described a case in which speech impairment was the first symptom of infantile onset. The patient had mental retardation, recurrent infections, hyperactivity, and mild facial dysmorphism. Beta-mannosidase activity was completely lacking in the patient and a heterozygous level was found in the parents. Mannosyl-N-acetylglucosamine was identified in the patient's urine.|In a black African 14-year-old boy, Levade et al. (1994) described severe deficiency of beta-mannosidase activity manifested by bilateral thenar and hypothenar amyotrophy, electrophysiologically demonstrable demyelinating peripheral neuropathy, and cytoplasmic vacuolation of skin fibroblasts and lymphoid cells. The authors cited reports of 10 patients in 7 families. |Rodriguez-Serna et al. (1996) described a 22-year-old woman who since the age of 12 years had progressive angiokeratoma affecting the lower limbs and buttocks, with no other abnormalities. Enzyme studies revealed beta-mannosidase deficiency in cultured fibroblasts and in serum and leukocytes. The patient's parents exhibited intermediate enzyme levels, confirming autosomal recessive inheritance. Rodriguez-Serna et al. (1996) stated that a total of 11 cases of beta-mannosidase deficiency occurring in 8 families had been reported. Mental retardation and neurologic disorders were present in most reported patients. |Sedel et al. (2006) reported an 18-year-old male patient with beta-mannosidosis who exhibited motor and vocal tics since childhood, attention deficit, hyperactivity, impulsivity, and aggressiveness consistent with Gilles de la Tourette syndrome (GTS; 137580). He also had bilateral hearing loss and mild cognitive impairment. Molecular analysis identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the MANBA gene (609489.0003 and 609489.0004). |
249650::Ampola et al. (1969) described a placid, hypokinetic, 45-year-old male, the product of brother-sister incest, who had a low IQ, grand mal seizures, flattened nasal bridge, and excessively arched palate. He was found in the course of screening mentally retarded patients with the nitroprusside test. He excreted large amounts of a sulfur-containing amino acid, shown by Crawhall et al. (1969) to be beta-mercaptolactate-cysteine disulfide. The structure of the disulfide is indicated by its name: in one-half of the molecule the-NH2 of cysteine is replaced by-OH. Administration of cysteine, but not of methionine, increased excretion of the mixed disulfide (Crawhall et al., 1971). |During a screening for cystinuria in the regular schools, Niederwieser et al. (1973) found the same material in the urine of 2 mentally normal sisters, aged 11 and 13 years.|In Sweden, Hannestad et al. (1981) detected MCDU in a mentally retarded woman. Her red cells were devoid of activity of the enzyme mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase (MPST; 602496). Both parents and 5 other relatives in a pattern consistent with their being heterozygotes showed intermediate levels of red cell MST. The presumed heterozygotes also excreted excessive amounts of mercaptolactate and mercaptoacetate in the urine. |
141900::The alpha (HBA1, 141800; HBA2, 141850) and beta (HBB) loci determine the structure of the 2 types of polypeptide chains in adult hemoglobin, HbA. Mutant beta globin that sickles causes sickle cell anemia (603903). Absence of beta chain causes beta-zero-thalassemia. Reduced amounts of detectable beta globin causes beta-plus-thalassemia. For clinical purposes, beta-thalassemia (613985) is divided into thalassemia major (transfusion dependent), thalassemia intermedia (of intermediate severity), and thalassemia minor (asymptomatic).|
613161::beta-ureidopropionase deficiency (UPB1D) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the UPB1 gene (606673) on chromosome 22q11.|Beta-ureidopropionase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism due to a defect in pyrimidine degradation. Less than 10 patients have been reported, and the phenotype can range from severe neurologic involvement with mental retardation and seizures to normal neurologic development (Yaplito-Lee et al., 2008). |Assmann et al. (1998) reported a 17-month-old girl who presented with muscular hypotonia, dystonic movements, scoliosis, microcephaly, and severe developmental delay. Biochemical studies showed increased N-carbamyl-beta-alanine and N-carbamyl-beta-aminoisobutyric acid in plasma, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Van Kuilenburg et al. (2000) reported the analysis of all 3 enzymes of the pyrimidine degradation pathway in liver biopsy of this patient and provided unambiguous evidence for complete deficiency of the activity of the third enzyme, beta-ureidopropionase.|Van Kuilenburg et al. (2004) reported 3 additional unrelated patients with genetically confirmed beta-ureidopropionase deficiency. A girl, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, developed afebrile seizures at age 8 months and showed motor retardation. Brain MRI showed delayed myelinization and an EEG showed hypsarrhythmia. At age 3 years, she had psychomotor retardation, severe mental retardation, and a speech disorder, although visual contact appeared to be normal. Another child was found to be cyanotic at age 4 months, developed status epilepticus, and had increased serum and CSF lactate. Other clinical details were limited. The last patient had hypertonia associated with an infection at age 1 month. The patient had normal psychomotor and neurologic development at 12 months. She started to walk independently at the age of 10 months and started to talk at 12 months. Two brothers had died at birth and at age 9 months. All had biochemical abnormalities consistent with the disorder. |Yaplito-Lee et al. (2008) reported an Australian boy with multiple congenital genitourinary and colorectal anomalies, including bladder exstrophy, anal atresia, duplicated appendix and distal colon, and bifid phallus and scrotum. Renal imaging showed moderate pelvicalyceal and ureteric dilatation and echogenic areas. At age 12 months, he showed normal growth, development, and neurologic examination. The authors noted that such structural abnormalities had not previously been reported in this disorder, and it could not be determined if the enzyme deficiency was responsible for these defects. |
607765::this disorder of bile acid synthesis, referred to here as CBAS1, can be caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding 3-beta-hydroxy-delta-5-C27-steroid oxidoreductase (HSD3B7; 607764) on chromosome 16p.|Congenital defects of bile acid synthesis are autosomal recessive disorders characterized by neonatal onset of progressive liver disease with cholestatic jaundice and malabsorption of lipids and lipid-soluble vitamins from the gastrointestinal tract resulting from a primary failure to synthesize bile acids. Affected infants show failure to thrive and secondary coagulopathy. In most forms of the disorder, there is a favorable response to oral bile acid therapy (summary by Cheng et al., 2003). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Congenital Defects in Bile Acid Synthesis |There are several disorders that result from defects in bile acid synthesis. See CBAS2 (235555), caused by mutation in the delta(4)-3-oxosteroid 5-beta-reductase gene (AKR1D1; 604741) on chromosome 7q33; CBAS3 (613812), caused by mutation in the 7-alpha hydroxylase gene (CYP7B1; 603711) on chromosome 8q12; CBAS4 (214950), caused by mutation in the AMACR gene (604489) on chromosome 5p13; CBAS5 (616278), caused by mutation in the ABCD3 gene (170995) on chromosome 1p21; and CBAS6 (617308), caused by mutation in the ACOX2 gene (601641) on chromosome 3p14.|See also progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis (PFIC1; 211600), which has a similar phenotype.|Clayton et al. (1987) described a sibship of 5 children in which 3 had progressive liver disease starting in the neonatal period. The Saudi Arabian parents were first cousins. The jaundice in these infants was cholestatic in nature and biopsy showed aggressive hepatitis with giant cells and bridging fibrosis with cirrhosis. Chenodeoxycholic acid and cholic acid were absent from the urine and plasma, indicating a defect in bile acid synthesis. Furthermore, 2 unusual bile acid precursors were found in the urine. Clayton et al. (1987) suggested that the infants suffered from a defect in 3-beta-hydroxy-delta-5-steroid dehydrogenase/isomerase. In the family of Clayton et al. (1987), Buchmann et al. (1990) found a serum accumulation of 7-alpha-hydroxy-cholesterol. Cultured fibroblasts from the patient were completely devoid of 3-beta-hydroxy-delta 5-C27-steroid dehydrogenase/isomerase activity. Fibroblasts from his parents had reduced activity, compatible with the heterozygous genotype. |Jacquemin et al. (1994) reported 5 unrelated children with progressive intrahepatic cholestasis caused by a primary defect in bile acid synthesis due to 3-beta-hydroxy-C27-steroid dehydrogenase deficiency. Clinical features included jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly, and fatty stools beginning in infancy. Liver function tests showed normal serum gamma-GGT (see 612346), low serum cholesterol and vitamin E levels, increased serum bilirubin, and coagulopathy. Liver function returned to normal after oral ursodeoxycholic acid therapy. Jacquemin et al. (1994) noted the importance of correct diagnosis in these patients to avoid liver transplantation. |Schwarz et al. (2000) studied the fifth child, a boy, from the sibship described by Clayton et al. (1987). An older sister and brother had died of complications of progressive liver disease. He weighed 4 kg at birth and exhibited jaundice 2 days later. He had been brought to clinical attention in Great Britain as a 3-month-old infant. He had moderate jaundice, hepatomegaly, and an accumulation of 3-beta,7-alpha-dihydroxy- and 3-beta,7-alpha,12-alpha-trihydroxy-5-cholenoic acids in his urine. The family returned to Saudi Arabia and the patient was lost to follow-up until age 2 years, when he was seen at the King Faisal Specialist Hospital. He was underdeveloped (25th percentile for weight, less than 5th percentile for height) and had persistent jaundice, pruritus, rickets, and hepatomegaly. Treatment with chenodeoxycholic acid led to increased well being, a decrease in pruritus, and a normalization of urinary steroids (Ichimiya et al., 1991). At the time of the report of Schwarz et al. (2000), he was 17 years old and doing well on cholic acid therapy. |
210500::Biliary atresia is a disorder of infants in which there is progressive obliteration or discontinuity of the extrahepatic biliary system, resulting in obstruction of bile flow. Untreated, the resulting cholestasis leads to progressive conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, cirrhosis, and hepatic failure (Bates et al., 1998). Most patients require liver transplantation within the first year of life (Leyva-Vega et al., 2010). |See also Alagille syndrome (118450), which includes biliary atresia as a feature.|Krauss (1964) noted the reports of 5 sibships in which 2 or more sibs had extrahepatic biliary atresia. Renal and cardiac malformations were associated in Krauss's cases. Sweet (1932) found 3 cases in 1 family; 2 of the 3 had right ventricular hypertrophy (one with ventricular septal defect and patent ductus arteriosus). Other familial cases have been reported by Hopkins (1941), Rumber (1961), and Whitten and Adie (1952). Schulte and Lenz (1978) observed extrahepatic biliary atresia in a brother and sister whose parents were related. |Danesino et al. (1999) described a family in which 1 brother had extrahepatic biliary atresia and a second brother had intrahepatic biliary atresia. |Among 251 cases of EHBA, Carmi et al. (1993) found 51 with associated anomalies. Analysis of segregation patterns of these anomalies suggested the existence of 2 major groups: 15 cases (29.4%) had various combinations of anomalies within the laterality sequence; 30 cases (58.8%) had 1 or 2 anomalies mostly involving the cardiac, gastrointestinal, and urinary systems. The latter anomalies did not follow any recognizable pattern. A third group of 6 cases had intestinal malrotation, some with preduodenal portal vein; these cases showed some similarity to the laterality sequence group and may represent a more confined phenotypic expression of faulty determination of situs. |
253260::biotinidase deficiency, a form of multiple carboxylase deficiency, is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the BTD gene (609019) on chromosome 3p25.|Multiple carboxylase deficiency (MCD) is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder characterized primarily by cutaneous and neurologic abnormalities. Symptoms result from the patient's inability to reutilize biotin, a necessary nutrient. Sweetman (1981) recognized that multiple carboxylase deficiency could be classified into early (see 253270) and late forms. The early form showed higher urinary excretion of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid and 3-hydroxypropionic acid than the late form and was associated with normal plasma biotin concentrations. Sweetman (1981) proposed a defect in holocarboxylase synthetase and intestinal biotin absorption, respectively. |Some patients with biotinidase deficiency present in infancy (Baumgartner et al., 1985; Kalayci et al., 1994), and some individuals with this deficiency are asymptomatic (Wolf et al., 1997). |Gompertz et al. (1971) reported a patient with biotin-responsive beta-methylcrotonylglycinuria who had a deficiency of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (Gompertz et al., 1973). On restudy of this patient, Sweetman et al. (1977) found that the patient was severely ketoacidotic, responded both clinically and biochemically to biotin, and excreted tiglylglycine, a metabolite of isoleucine that is excreted by patients with propionic acidemia due to propionyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency (606054). The deficiency of 2 mitochondrial carboxylases, both containing biotin, suggested that the fundamental defect was either in the transport of biotin or in the holocarboxylase synthetase that attaches biotin covalently to both carboxylases. |Charles et al. (1979) reported a presumed case of biotinidase deficiency in a 10-month-old boy who presented with dermatitis, alopecia, severe hypotonia, and developmental regression. Urinary organic acid analysis showed high levels of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid, beta-methylcrotonylglycine, and 3-hydroxypropionic acid. Activities of propionyl CoA-carboxylase, beta-methylcrotonyl CoA-carboxylase, and pyruvate carboxylase in cultured fibroblasts were normal. Treatment with oral biotin resulted in a dramatic clinical improvement, and the authors postulated a defect in biotin absorption or transport. Lehnert et al. (1979) described a 10-week-old girl with hypotonia, recurrent seizures, and 3-methylcrotonylglycine and 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid in the urine. She also had small, but pathologic amounts of urinary propionic acid and methylcitric acid, suggesting a defect in the metabolism of biotin. Clinically and metabolically, the child responded to biotin. Bartlett et al. (1980) reported a child with a combined deficiency of propionyl-CoA carboxylase, 3-methlycrotonyl-CoA carboxylase, and pyruvate carboxylase. Cultured fibroblasts responded to administration of biotin. The primary defect was thought to involve either biotin metabolism or its intracellular transport. |Sander et al. (1980) reported a family with biotin-responsive MCD. Affected children presented with a skin rash, infections, acute intermittent ataxia, and lactic acidosis. Postmortem examination of 1 patient showed atrophy of the superior vermis of the cerebellum, similar to that seen in chronic alcoholism. |Wolf et al. (1983) reported 3 children with late-onset multiple carboxylase deficiency from 2 unrelated families. All patients had almost undetectable levels of biotinidase, whereas all 3 parents tested had an intermediate level. Wolf et al. (1983) suggested that the defect in the late-onset form of the disorder may not reside in intestinal absorption of biotin as had been suggested (Munnich et al., 1981; Thoene et al., 1982), but rather in biotinidase. Thoene and Wolf (1983) suggested that juvenile MCD probably results from impaired generation of free biotin from biotinyl residues of dietary protein. They noted that affected children are born with presumably normal stores of free biotin, but become deficient once dependent on dietary protein-bound biotin. This mechanism explained the clinical variability of the disorder and the relative delay in onset of symptoms compared to the neonatal onset in holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency. |Gaudry et al. (1983) confirmed biotinidase deficiency in a patient with multiple carboxylase deficiency and showed that the deficiency is present also in liver. |Fischer et al. (1982) reported a patient with MCD and impaired immunoregulatory functions due to defective prostaglandin E (PGE) monocyte production. Both PGE deficiency and immunoregulatory dysfunction responded to biotin administration. The authors suggested that the PGE deficiency resulted from impaired activity of acetyl-CoA carboxylase, which produces malonyl-CoA required for prostaglandin synthesis. |Wolf et al. (1985) reviewed the clinical presentation of 31 children with late-onset multiple carboxylase deficiency due to biotinidase deficiency. Symptoms usually appeared by about 3 months of age with seizures as the most frequent initial symptom. Other main features included hypotonia, ataxia, hearing loss, optic atrophy, skin rash, and alopecia. Metabolic abnormalities included ketolactic acidosis and organic aciduria. If untreated, symptoms became progressively worse, resulting in coma and death. Treatment with massive doses of biotin reversed the symptoms of alopecia, skin rash, ataxia, and developmental delay. See review of Sweetman and Nyhan (1986). |Baumgartner et al. (1985) observed that clinical and biochemical consequences of severe biotin deficiency occur within 12 days of birth. In affected patients with BTD deficiency, they found normal intestinal absorption of biotin and urinary loss of biotin and biocytin. Suormala et al. (1985) also found normal intestinal biotin absorption and increased urinary excretion of free biotin compared to controls. They concluded that renal loss of biotin was one of the factors contributing to the high biotin requirements in patients with BTD deficiency. Oral biotin supplementation resulted in increased activity of biotin-dependent carboxylases as early as 45 minutes. |Wolf et al. (1985) reported 2 patients with biotinidase deficiency who were identified among 81,243 newborns screened in the first year of a statewide screening program in Virginia. Both probands had mild neurologic symptoms at 2 and 4 months, respectively, and the 2 older sibs of 1 proband had more severe neurologic abnormalities, cutaneous findings, and developmental delay. None of the affected children had acute metabolic decompensation. Wastell et al. (1988) studied 10 patients with biotinidase deficiency. Clinical findings at presentation varied, with dermatologic signs (dermatitis and alopecia), neurologic abnormalities (seizures, hypotonia, and ataxia), and recurrent infections being the most common features, although none of these occurred in every case. Treatment with biotin resulted in pronounced, rapid clinical and biochemical improvement, but some patients had residual neurologic damage: neurosensory hearing loss, visual pathway defects, ataxia, and mental retardation. |Taitz et al. (1983) reported sensorineural deafness and severe myopia associated with a progressive retinal pigment epithelium dysplasia in a child with biotinidase deficiency, despite normal intelligence and neuromotor function. Thuy et al. (1986) reported a patient who first presented at age 5 years and had already developed sensorineural abnormalities of the optic and auditory nerves. The abnormalities did not resolve with treatment. Schulz et al. (1988) described bilateral basal ganglia calcifications in a 29-month-old girl with biotinidase deficiency who presented with ataxia. |Laryngeal stridor was a striking feature in cases of biotinidase deficiency reported by Giardini et al. (1981), Dionisi-Vici et al. (1988), and Tokatli et al. (1992). The patient of Tokatli et al. (1992) was a 30-month-old girl admitted with acute spastic laryngitis. At the ages of 10, 18, and 29 months, she had developed a noisy breathing pattern diagnosed as bronchitis that persisted for several weeks despite antibiotic therapy. At age 23 months, she developed erythematous cutaneous lesions involving the entire body, followed by seborrheic dermatitis of the scalp and sudden-onset alopecia. Laboratory analysis showed lactic acidosis and increased serum and urinary alanine. Normalization of both the respiratory symptoms and the metabolic abnormalities occurred within 2 hours of starting biotin therapy. |Kalayci et al. (1994) described 2 patients with biotinidase deficiency who were diagnosed with infantile spasms at 1 month of age. They concluded that biotinidase deficiency may present early in the neonatal period without characteristic findings such as alopecia and seborrheic dermatitis. |Suormala et al. (1990) compared 13 infants with partial biotinidase deficiency, detected in neonatal screening in Switzerland, Germany, and Austria, with 4 patients with classic biotinidase deficiency. Residual enzyme activity was present in the 'partial' cases. |Wolf et al. (1997) reported 2 unrelated asymptomatic adults with biotinidase deficiency who were diagnosed only because their affected children were identified by newborn screening. One patient was a 32-year-old Caucasian man who had never had symptoms of the disorder and showed no physical or neurologic abnormalities. His diet was not unusually enriched with biotin-containing foods, he did not pursue a low-protein diet, and he did not take supplemental vitamins. His parents were consanguineous and he was related to his wife. The family of this man and his wife was of German ancestry and could be traced back to the 1750s to a common founding ancestor who lived in the same small rural community in northwestern Virginia where they lived. The second asymptomatic adult reported by Wolf et al. (1997) was a 36-year-old Caucasian woman who had had no symptoms of the disorder and no dietary restrictions or abnormalities. A 15-year-old daughter was also found to have profound biotinidase deficiency but no clinical symptoms of the disorder, with the possible exception of a skin rash that occurred a few months earlier, was described as 'hives,' and resolved spontaneously. The mother's parentage was French Canadian and consanguineous; her husband was of northern Irish background and not known to be related to her.|
125480::Bipolar affective disorder is a genetically heterogeneous complex trait. One susceptibility locus for bipolar disorder, MAFD1, has been mapped to chromosome 18p.|Other mapped loci include MAFD2 (309200) on chromosome Xq28, MAFD3 (609633) on chromosome 21q22, MAFD4 (611247) on chromosome 16p12, MAFD7 (612371) on chromosome 22q12, MAFD8 (612357) on chromosome 10q21, and MAFD9 (612372) on chromosome 12p13.|Epistatic interaction has been postulated for loci designated MAFD5 (611535) on chromosome 2q22-q24 and MAFD6 (611536) on chromosome 6q23-q24.|Depressive disorders represent a prevalent (1 to 2%) and major illness characterized by episodes of dysphoria that are associated with somatic symptoms. It may have a manic-depressive (bipolar) or purely depressive (unipolar) course. The most characteristic features of bipolar affective disorder (BPAD) are episodes of mania (bipolar I, BP I) or hypomania (bipolar II, BP II) interspersed with periods of depression (Goodwin and Jamison, 1990). If untreated, manic-depressive illness is associated with a suicide rate of approximately 20%.|
614923::BCKDK deficiency is caused by homozygous mutation in the BCKDK (614901) gene on chromosome 16p11.|Novarino et al. (2012) studied 3 consanguineous families with autism, epilepsy, intellectual disability, and reduced branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs). All patients were born at full term to unaffected parents. The first family (558), of Turkish origin, had 2 affected daughters. The first daughter developed normally until the age of 18 months, when she had her first seizure. She met criteria for autism by 15 years of age. At ages 20 and 21, electroencephalogram (EEG) detected extratemporal and generalized epileptiform abnormalities, and despite treatment with anticonvulsants, she had tonic-clonic seizures every 3 months lasting 3 to 4 minutes each. Her sister was similarly affected. The second family (18) was of Egyptian origin and consisted of an affected brother and sister. The girl had had a febrile seizure at 1 year of age and a generalized nonfebrile seizure at 8 years of age. EEG at age 8 showed frequent focal spike wave complexes over the left temporal region consistent with left temporal epileptogenic dysfunction. Her similarly affected brother had 4 febrile seizures at the age of 12 months; he was started on valproate and had a recurrence of febrile seizures every 4 to 5 months subsequently. At age 2 years 5 months he started on phenobarbital and had not had a seizure since. The family history was notable for a paternal uncle with schizophrenia, a second-degree cousin with intellectual disability, and a distant cousin also with schizophrenia. A third consanguineous family (1435) of Libyan origin consisted of 2 affected brothers. The first boy at 9 years of age was able to follow simple directions but did not speak. EEG was normal at age 11 years. He met criteria for autism on several scales. The similarly affected second brother had abnormal EEG at age 7, with right temporal slowing and rare surface negative frontal sharp waves.|
211530::Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome-1 (BVVLS1), a form of progressive bulbar palsy with sensorineural deafness, is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the C20ORF54 gene (SLC52A3; 613350) on chromosome 20p13.|Mutations in the SLC52A3 gene also result in Fazio-Londe disease (211500), a disorder similar to BVVLS but without sensorineural deafness.|Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive neurologic disorder characterized by sensorineural hearing loss and a variety of cranial nerve palsies, usually involving the motor components of the seventh and ninth to twelfth (more rarely the third, fifth, and sixth) cranial nerves. Spinal motor nerves and, less commonly, upper motor neurons are sometimes affected, giving a picture resembling amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS; 105400). The onset of the disease is usually in the second decade, but earlier and later onset have been reported. Hearing loss tends to precede the onset of neurologic signs, mostly progressive muscle weakness causing respiratory compromise. However, patients with very early onset may present with bulbar palsy and may not develop hearing loss until later. The symptoms, severity, and disease duration are variable (summary by Green et al., 2010). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere Syndrome|See also BVVLS2 (614707), caused by mutation in the SLC52A2 gene (607882) on chromosome 8q.|The first case of BVVLS was reported by Brown (1894) as a form of familial infantile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Familial cases in a pattern consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance were reported by Vialetto (1936), Van Laere (1966), and Boudin et al. (1971). Most familial cases involved affected females. |Gallai et al. (1981) described the clinical features of 2 patients and the clinical and postmortem findings in the sib of one of these. One of these patients was a girl who became deaf at age 2 and developed multiple cranial and spinal nerve palsies at age 14. Her brother died of the condition at age 2. The parents were unrelated. The third case, sporadic, had onset of deafness at age 6 and of other neurologic disturbances at age 12. |Hawkins et al. (1990) reported an affected family. The proband was a healthy, athletic young girl until the age of 12 years when, over the course of a few weeks, she had rapid onset of neurosensory deafness. The following year she developed rapidly progressive weakness with clumsiness of her arms and difficulty in washing, dressing, writing, and combing her hair. At that time she also tended to shake and twitch, particularly at night. She complained of sleepiness during the day and of shortness of breath and was unable to rise from a supine position. Her speech was soft and she had difficulty swallowing. Treatment with steroids for 12 months when she was 13 years old resulted in improvement, but at the age of 15 she began to deteriorate again. She had nocturnal hypoventilation and daytime sleepiness resulting from diaphragmatic weakness, as well as right vocal cord paralysis and increasing difficulty swallowing. She died at the age of 17 years 4 months. A paternal aunt who had had breathing difficulties for 20 years and facial weakness for 2 years showed pallor of the left optic disc and weakness of the facial and neck muscles as well as neurosensory deafness. The tongue was wasted and fasciculating, and the diaphragm was weak. She refused examination of her 10 children. According to the school doctor, 1 of her sons had developed neurosensory deafness in his teens. The paternal grandfather died at the age of 40 years with chronic respiratory problems. |Dipti et al. (2005) reported 4 sibs, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, with BVVLS. Two presented in the first 16 months of life with stridor and died of respiratory failure by the age of 2 years. Both had normal early psychomotor development before onset of the disorder. Hearing loss was not apparent in these infants, and they were given a diagnosis of Fazio-Londe disease (211500). In contrast, the 2 other sibs showed onset of a bulbar palsy at age 5 and 7 years, followed by onset of deafness and an anterior horn neuropathy with corticospinal tract involvement. Features included dysphagia, facial weakness with ptosis, tongue weakness and fasciculations, muscle weakness, particularly of the upper limbs, hyperreflexia, ankle clonus, and extensor plantar responses. They exhibited a relatively slow but relentless decline over a period of several years, resulting in death at age 10 years in one and severe muscle weakness in the other. Dipti et al. (2005) noted the overlap between BVVLS and Fazio-Londe syndrome, and suggested that both younger children may have developed deafness later. The authors suggested that these disorders may be a single disease entity, which could be considered a form of juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. |Green et al. (2010) reported 9 patients with BVVLS from 7 families, including 1 reported by Dipti et al. (2005). Members of 4 families showed onset of the disorder before 2 years of age, with bulbar palsy, hypotonia, anterior horn involvement, respiratory insufficiency, and early death in most. Two sisters in another family showed onset of sensorineural deafness at age 12 years and were still alive in their twenties and thirties with muscle weakness and respiratory compromise. The proband from another family showed onset in his early twenties of a peripheral neuropathy, and later developed deafness and ataxia without respiratory compromise. He was alive at age 57 years. Green et al. (2010) noted the variable age at onset and variable severity of this disorder. |Johnson et al. (2010) reported a consanguineous Turkish family in which 3 children had BVVLS. The phenotype was homogeneous, even though there was over 20 years' difference in the age at onset. The proband developed normally until she presented in mid-childhood with acute respiratory distress, stridor, and paralysis of vocal cord abduction, requiring ventilation. She later developed cranial nerve palsies with ophthalmoplegia, dysarthria, dysphagia, tongue fasciculation, facial weakness, and weakness and wasting of the limbs. She died at age 8 years of respiratory failure. Postmortem examination showed replacement gliosis of the cranial nuclei, particularly at the bulbo-pontine level, but only mild anterior horn cell involvement. The proband's affected sister developed rapid onset of hearing loss at the age of 10 years. In the following years she developed similar features as her sister, with progressive bulbar palsy, dysarthria, dysphagia, tongue fasciculation, facial weakness, weakness and wasting of the limbs, and breathing problems. She had a motor neuronopathy and axonal degeneration. She died at age 29 from respiratory failure. A younger niece was also affected, but was in the early stages of the disease with hearing problems and cranial nerve palsies. |
300615::Brunner syndrome (BRNRS) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding monoamine oxidase A (MAOA; 309850) on chromosome Xp11.|Brunner syndrome is a recessive X-linked disorder characterized by impulsive aggressiveness and mild mental retardation associated with MAOA deficiency (Brunner et al., 1993). |In a large Dutch kindred, Brunner et al. (1993) identified a novel form of X-linked nondysmorphic mild mental retardation. All affected males in the family showed characteristic abnormal behavior, in particular aggressive and sometimes violent behavior. Other types of impulsive behavior included arson, attempted rape, and exhibitionism. Attempted suicide was reported in a single case. Results of urinalysis in 3 affected males indicated a marked disturbance of monoamine metabolism. These data were considered consistent with a primary defect in the structural gene for MAOA and/or MAOB (309860). Normal platelet MAOB activity suggested that the unusual behavior pattern in this family may be caused by isolated MAOA deficiency. |Piton et al. (2014) reported a French family in which several affected males manifested a cognitive disorder similar to Brunner syndrome. The 7-year-old proband had autism as well as impulsive and autoaggressive behavior, and showed anger when frustrated. Other features included feeding and sleep difficulties in early life, delayed motor development, and amimic facial expressions. Laboratory studies showed increased urinary levels of the MAOA substrates normetanephrine and metanephrine, as well as decreased serum levels of MAOA products. The proband's 2 maternal uncles had severely delayed psychomotor development requiring placement in a school for special needs in childhood. They had autistic features and auto- and heteroaggressive outbursts, could not read or write, and had poor autonomy. Both suffered from familial neglect and had been maltreated and sexually abused in early childhood. Two deceased maternal great-uncles of the proband reportedly had encephalopathy and had been institutionalized their whole lives. The maternal grandmother of the proband had depression and psychotic disturbances; the proband's mother was unaffected. |Palmer et al. (2016) reported 2 unrelated families from Australia with Brunner syndrome. All patients were adults at the time of the report. In family H, 2 brothers had mild intellectual disability with limited literacy and a history of impulsivity, school expulsions, violent episodes, explosive tempers, limited interests with obsessive behavior, disturbed wake/sleep cycle, occasional body twitches, and essential tremor. The patients did not receive psychopharmacologic treatment, and no specific serotonergic symptoms or worsening of behavior with high tyramine foods or medication were noted. In family R, previously reported by Cheung and Earl (2001), 2 brothers had mild intellectual disability with poor or absent literacy and attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The patients were generally 'placid,' but 1 had a history of impulsive and aggressive behavior when ingesting high tyramine foods, severe night terrors, and episodic flushing, diarrhea, and headache. The other patient had difficulty sustaining friendships and some obsessive traits, but only occasional episodes of flushing, diarrhea, and headache. Both also had essential tremor. Their mother had normal intelligence with paroxysmal episodes of flushing, diarrhea, headache, and palpitations. All affected members of family R had exacerbation of serotonergic symptoms when consuming food and drink high in tyramine, and responded favorably to treatment with a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI). Biochemical studies of patient tissue samples showed high serum serotonin and urinary metanephrines and low urinary 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) and vanillylmandelic acid (VMA). |
271900::Canavan disease is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding aspartoacylase (ASPA; 608034) on chromosome 17p13.|The salient clinical features of Canavan disease are onset in early infancy, atonia of neck muscles, hypotonia, hyperextension of legs and flexion of arms, blindness, severe mental defect, megalocephaly, and death by 18 months on the average. The neurologic findings are due to demyelination and leukodystrophy. Neuropathologic changes include spongy degeneration and astrocytic swelling with normal neurons (Matalon et al., 1988 and Matalon et al., 1989). Morphologic abnormality of the mitochondria of astrocytes was emphasized by Adornato et al. (1972). |In 3 patients from 2 families of Ashkenazi descent with the diagnosis of cerebral spongy degeneration, or Canavan disease, Matalon et al. (1988) found increased amounts of N-acetylaspartic acid (NAA) in the urine and plasma. Aspartoacylase was assayed in cultured skin fibroblasts from 1 patient of each family, and a profound deficiency of the enzyme was found. Although the function of N-acetylaspartic acid was not understood, it was known to occur in high concentration in human brain. In an addendum, Matalon et al. (1988) reported finding aspartoacylase deficiency in a case of Canavan disease in a third family from Australia. |Matalon et al. (1989) reported studies of 21 patients with Canavan disease. The diagnosis of spongy degeneration was confirmed by brain biopsy in 14. All patients had excessive urinary NAA excretion almost 200 times the amounts found in normal age-matched individuals or obligate carriers. One sample of cerebrospinal fluid from a patient with Canavan disease contained 232 micromoles/liter of NAA, whereas in a control sample NAA was undetectable. Deficiency of aspartoacylase was found in all 21 patients. The levels of aspartoacylase in obligate carriers were less than 50% of control values. Matalon et al. (1989) also showed that NAA was not elevated in the urine in other forms of leukodystrophy such as Alexander disease (203450), in which megalencephaly similar to that in patients with Canavan disease occurs, metachromatic leukodystrophy (250100), Krabbe disease (245200), and adrenoleukodystrophy (300100). |Matalon et al. (1989) indicated that congenital, infantile, and late-onset forms of Canavan disease had been reported. Pathologic studies show spongy degeneration of the brain white matter, which is a nonspecific morphologic change and occurs in a number of situations. For example, spongy degeneration rather closely resembling that of Canavan disease was observed in a case of homocystinuria (236200) (Chou and Waisman, 1965). |Feigelman et al. (1991) described prolonged survival in a 33-year-old Ashkenazi Jewish woman with Canavan disease. At the age of 2 years, mental retardation and extrapyramidal cerebral palsy had been diagnosed. At age 5 years, she was blind, but both pupils reacted to light, and she showed decerebrate posturing elicited by acute extension of the neck. Hyperreflexia with an extensor plantar response was observed. Generalized seizures first occurred at age 8 years. By age 20, she showed bilateral optic atrophy. By the time of report at age 33.5 years, she had deteriorated to a 'persistent vegetative state.' A younger sister was also mentally retarded with delayed development and died following aspiration at the age of 9 years.|In 2 sibs with Canavan disease from a consanguineous marriage, Ishiyama et al. (2003) examined the temporal bone and found bilateral absence of the organ of Corti as well as absence of supporting cells and hair cells. There was mild secondary atrophy of the spiral ganglia neurons, but the auditory nerves and vestibular end organs and nerves were normal. The authors suggested a role for ASPA in the neurodevelopment of the organ of Corti. |
237300::hyperammonemia due to carbamoyl phosphate syntetase I deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the CPS1 gene (608307) on chromosome 2q34.|Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I deficiency is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism of the urea cycle which causes hyperammonemia. There are 2 main forms: a lethal neonatal type and a less severe, delayed-onset type (summary by Klaus et al., 2009). |Urea cycle disorders are characterized by the triad of hyperammonemia, encephalopathy, and respiratory alkalosis. Five disorders involving different defects in the biosynthesis of the enzymes of the urea cycle have been described: ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (311250), carbamyl phosphate synthetase deficiency, argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency, or citrullinemia (215700), argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (207900), and arginase deficiency (207800).|This disorder was first reported by Freeman et al. (1970) in a patient with congenital hyperammonemia and decreased levels of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase. A family with 3 affected sibs was reported by Hommes et al. (1969) and by Ebels (1972). One affected infant had severe cerebral damage. Gelehrter and Snodgrass (1974) reported a case and commented on the fact that it is mitochondrial carbamoyl phosphate synthetase that is deficient in this condition. |Suzuki et al. (1986) described a female infant with CPS I deficiency who died on the ninth postnatal day. They could detect no enzyme protein or mRNA activity for CPS I. |Finckh et al. (1998) reported a male infant with severe CPS I deficiency who died at 11 days of age. The parents were consanguineous. Three days after normal term delivery, he developed hyperammonemic coma. Histopathologic examination of the liver showed diffuse microvesicular steatosis, distinct focal hepatocellular and Kupffer cell glycogenosis, and no enzymatic CPS I activity. A mutation in the CPS1 gene was detected (608307.0002). |Granot et al. (1986) reported an Arab child in whom the diagnosis of partial CPS deficiency was first made when she presented at 9 years of age with hyperammonemic coma simulating Reye syndrome. Despite intensive therapy directed toward lowering of ammonia levels, she sustained irreversible brain damage. History showed that on the seventh day of life, the child developed seizures for which phenobarbitone was administered. Her psychomotor development was slow. She attended a regular school but was a below-average student. She was on a regular diet with no apparent aversion to protein. At the age of 6 years she began to experience episodes of vomiting, mild abdominal pain, and muscle weakness. These episodes were not associated with any intercurrent infection or dietary change; they lasted for 2 or 3 days and occurred up to 3 times a year. During these attacks she remained mentally alert. |Verbiest et al. (1992) described a 32-year-old woman who was first discovered to have CPS I deficiency when investigated after valproic acid-induced coma. Valproic acid had been added to the regimen for control of generalized seizures a few days before the development of coma. The seizures were attributed to head trauma at the age of 16. 'Valproate sensitivity' has been observed also with ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency and citrullinemia, 2 other causes of hyperammonemia. Wong et al. (1994) described a 26-year-old college graduate and teacher who presented with coma after childbirth and was found to have CPS I deficiency. Ten hours after delivery of her only pregnancy, she became disoriented and agitated and progressed within a few hours to coma and decerebrate posturing. Within 24 hours, she developed generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Three days after delivery she was flaccid, did not have spontaneous respiration, and had diabetes insipidus. Urinary orotic acid level was somewhat elevated. She was declared dead at 3 days after delivery at which time EEG showed no cerebral electrical activity. The history reported by the authors indicated that she had been on a self-selected diet with little or no meat or dairy products and that she had occasionally complained of spells of confusion and disorientation and had been diagnosed as having complex partial seizures. |Batshaw et al. (2014) reported the results of an analysis of 614 patients with urea cycle disorders (UCDs) enrolled in the Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium's longitudinal study protocol. Carbamyl phosphate synthetase deficiency was found in 17 individuals (3%). Batshaw et al. (2014) found the risk of mortality (neonatal plus late onset) to be 42%. |
255120::carnitine palmitoyltransferase deficiency I is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding carnitine palmitoyltransferase IA (CPT1A; 600528) on chromosome 11q13.|CPT I deficiency is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder of long-chain fatty acid oxidation characterized by severe episodes of hypoketotic hypoglycemia usually occurring after fasting or illness. Onset is in infancy or early childhood (Bougneres et al., 1981) |Bougneres et al. (1981) reported 2 sisters who developed severe hypoketotic hypoglycemia at age 8 months, resulting in death in 1 of them. Other features included hepatomegaly, nonketotic hypoglycemia, and coma. Liver CPT activity was absent in the patient who was tested. |Demaugre et al. (1988) reported 2 patients with carnitine palmitoyltransferase deficiency and hepatic symptoms. Biochemical analysis of fibroblasts showed a decrease in CPT1 activity which resulted in impaired long-chain fatty acid oxidation. Bonnefont et al. (1989) reported a patient who presented at age 14 months with seizures and hypoketotic hypoglycemia. Administration of medium-chain triglycerides relieved the hypoglycemia and generated a brisk ketogenesis. Biochemical analysis showed decreased CPT I activity (approximately 10% of controls) in fibroblasts; oxidation of palmitate was about 5% of controls. |Falik-Borenstein et al. (1989) reported a 26-month-old Mexican female born to parents from a sparsely populated genetic isolate. Beginning at 1 year of age, she had suffered 3 severe Reye syndrome-like episodes precipitated by mild viral illnesses. These episodes were characterized by coma, aketotic hypoglycemia, mild hyperammonemia, elevated serum transaminases, elevated plasma free fatty acids, and hepatomegaly with fatty infiltration. Recovery with glucose treatment and other nonspecific measures was accompanied by severe hypertriglyceridemia. Renal tubular acidosis, both proximal and distal, was noted. Within 20 minutes of administration of medium-chain triglycerides, plasma glucose rose to 75 mg/% without hypertriglyceridemia. After 2 months of treatment with medium-chain triglycerides, renal tubular acidosis completely resolved. Falik-Borenstein et al. (1992) reported a girl with CPT I deficiency in whom clinical manifestations began at 14 months of age and were followed by renal tubular acidosis. Therapy with medium-chain triglycerides resulted in the disappearance of the renal defects, catch-up growth within 2 months, and the ability to tolerate viral infections without developing hypoglycemia or other problems. |In a boy with CPT I deficiency, Stanley et al. (1992) found that plasma carnitine levels were twice the normal levels. Urinary dicarboxylic acids were not elevated. |Haworth et al. (1991, 1992) described this disorder in a brother and sister and a female second cousin in an extended Hutterite family. The patients were first seen between 8 and 18 months of age with recurrent episodes of hypoketotic hypoglycemia accompanied by a decreased level of consciousness and hepatomegaly. One patient had 2 Reye syndrome-like episodes. The patients were successfully treated with medium-chain triglycerides and avoidance of fasting. |IJlst et al. (1998) reported a child, born of consanguineous parents, who presented at age 15 months with diarrhea and feeding difficulties. She was hypotonic and lethargic, and physical examination showed hepatomegaly, hypoketotic hypoglycemia, and elevated liver function tests. Biochemical studies showed decreased beta-oxidation of long-chain fatty acids and decreased CPT Ia activity and protein levels. |Innes et al. (2000) reported a 19-year-old Inuit woman who presented in pregnancy with acute fatty liver of pregnancy and hyperemesis gravidarum. Laboratory analysis showed elevated liver enzymes, direct hyperbilirubinemia, and ultrasound findings consistent with fatty liver. After induced labor and delivery, the mother's illness resolved. A second pregnancy was complicated by hyperemesis without documented liver disease. Biochemical analysis showed decreased fibroblast palmitate oxidation in both offspring (34% and 14% of control, respectively) and in the mother (50% of control). Both offspring had complete absence of CPT I activity. Innes et al. (2000) postulated that the defect in long-chain fatty acid oxidation in the fetus produced abnormal metabolites that entered the maternal circulation, leading to liver toxicity, hepatocellular necrosis, and acute fatty liver. The findings increased the spectrum of disorders of the fetus causing maternal liver disease in pregnancy. |Olpin et al. (2001) reported 4 cases of CPT I deficiency in 3 families showing variable renal tubular acidosis, transient hyperlipidemia, and, paradoxically, myopathy with elevated creatine kinase or cardiac involvement in the neonatal period. |
212140::primary systemic carnitine deficiency (CDSP) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SLC22A5 gene (603377) on chromosome 5q31.|Primary systemic carnitine deficiency is due to a defect in the high-affinity carnitine transporter expressed in muscle, heart, kidney, lymphoblasts, and fibroblasts. This results in impaired fatty acid oxidation in skeletal and heart muscle. In addition, renal wasting of carnitine results in low serum levels and diminished hepatic uptake of carnitine by passive diffusion, which impairs ketogenesis (Lamhonwah et al., 2002). If diagnosed early, all clinical manifestations of the disorder can be completely reversed by supplementation of carnitine. However, if left untreated, patients will develop lethal heart failure (summary by Shibbani et al., 2014). |See also myopathic carnitine deficiency (212160), which is restricted to skeletal muscle.|Karpati et al. (1975) reported systemic carnitine deficiency in an 11-year-old boy who had had recurrent episodes of hepatic and cerebral dysfunction and underdeveloped muscles. Overt weakness developed at age 10. Lipid excess, especially in type I fibers, was found in muscle. There was marked carnitine deficiency in skeletal muscle, plasma, and liver. Oral replacement therapy resulted in clinical improvement and restored carnitine levels to normal in plasma, but not in liver or muscle. |Chapoy et al. (1980) reported a 3.5-year-old boy who presented at age 3 months with an acute episode of lethargy, somnolence, hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly, and cardiomegaly. He had hypoketotic hypoglycemia associated with decreased carnitine in plasma, muscle, and liver (all less than 5% of normal values). Prolonged treatment with oral carnitine over a 6-month period resulted in increased muscle strength, a dramatic reduction in cardiac size, relief of cardiomyopathy, partial repletion of carnitine levels in plasma and muscle, and complete repletion in the liver. |Tripp et al. (1981) reported systemic carnitine deficiency in a patient with cardiomyopathy. |Waber et al. (1982) described a 3.5-year-old boy with cardiomegaly, congestive heart failure, and skeletal muscle weakness. A brother had died of heart failure. In the proband, muscle and plasma carnitine were reduced to 2 and 10% of the normal mean values, respectively. Treatment with carnitine resolved the cardiac disease and muscle weakness. Plasma carnitine concentrations increased with treatment, but urinary carnitine excretion also increased 30-fold of normal, indicating a defect in renal carnitine reabsorption. |Matsuishi et al. (1985) described 2 Japanese brothers with a lipid storage myopathy and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Their developmental milestones were normal until 3 years of age when mild weakness of the lower limbs became evident. Carnitine was decreased in skeletal muscle and serum. Treatment with L-carnitine resulted in marked clinical improvement. |Treem et al. (1988) described a female infant with hypoketotic hypoglycemia who had a serious defect of carnitine transport in kidney, muscle, and cultured fibroblasts. Urinary carnitine content was increased, but plasma content was low. Carnitine concentrations are normally kept 20 to 40 times higher in tissue than in plasma by a carrier-mediated transport process that is driven by the large sodium gradient across the plasma membrane. Carnitine transport systems have been identified that may be involved in the renal conservation of carnitine. Although carnitine deficiency in the liver of this patient could be corrected when plasma carnitine levels were raised to normal, carnitine deficiency in muscle was not corrected, suggesting that a transport defect was present in muscle but not in liver. The same defect may have been present in the patient of Waber et al. (1982), although the presenting problem in that case was progressive cardiomyopathy and chronic muscle weakness that began at 2 years of age, was not accompanied by episodes of hypoglycemia, and was reversed by carnitine treatment. Eriksson et al. (1988) reported very low levels of carnitine in fibroblasts from a girl with carnitine deficiency and myopathy who may have had the same defect as in the patient of Treem et al. (1988). |Stanley et al. (1991) examined the presenting features of 15 infants and children with defects in carnitine uptake. Progressive cardiomyopathy, with or without chronic muscle weakness, was the most common presentation; the median age of onset was 3 years. Other patients presented with episodes of fasting hypoglycemia during the first 2 years of life before cardiomyopathy became apparent. A defect in carnitine uptake was demonstrable in fibroblasts and leukocytes; the defect appeared to be expressed also in muscle and kidney. In parents, the concentrations of plasma carnitine and the rates of carnitine uptake were intermediate between those of affected patients and normal controls, consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance. Stanley et al. (1991) emphasized that early recognition and treatment with high doses of oral carnitine can be life-saving. |Shoji et al. (1998) reported a Japanese girl with carnitine deficiency who began to complain intermittently of easy fatigue, vomiting, and abdominal pain at the age of 7 years and was first admitted to hospital at 8 years of age. She had unexplained fever, weakness, irregular respiration, and bradycardia, and had lapsed into unconsciousness. She was found to have hepatomegaly and muscle weakness. Echocardiogram showed left ventricular hypertrophy with normal left ventricular systolic function. The symptoms gradually abated with intravenous glucose infusion and disappeared within a few days. However, hyperammonemia and extremely low carnitine concentrations in the serum were not alleviated by the treatment. Carnitine uptake was assessed in vitro by use of cultured skin fibroblasts from the proband and her parents. This was the proband's first episode of a Reye-like syndrome. There was no family history of sudden infant death syndrome, Reye syndrome, or unexplained neuralgic, cardiac, or muscle disease. |Marques (1998) reported a 6-year-old Chinese girl, born of nonconsanguineous parents, who presented with acute heart failure due to dilated cardiomyopathy. A defect in the plasma membrane carnitine transporter was confirmed by carnitine uptake assay on fibroblast cultures. She had an excellent response to carnitine therapy. |Nezu et al. (1999) reported a 5-year-old boy with systemic carnitine deficiency. He had recurrent episodes of Reye syndrome, including encephalopathy, hyperammonemia, elevated liver enzymes, and hepatic steatosis. He had had episodes of hypoglycemia in the first 2 years of life. Oral carnitine prevented further episodes. |Lamhonwah et al. (2004) reported a 3-year-old Saudi Arabian girl, born of consanguineous parents, who presented at 6 months with recurrent respiratory infections. She had dilated cardiomyopathy, was hypotonic, and showed mildly delayed gross motor development. Laboratory studies showed impaired fatty acid oxidation and decreased carnitine uptake in skin fibroblasts (less than 1% of control values). Treatment with oral carnitine resulted in improved muscle tone and exercise tolerance as well as improved cardiac function. Intellectual and motor development were normal at age 3 years. Molecular analysis identified a homozygous mutation in the SLC22A5 gene (R254X; 603377.0019). |El-Hattab et al. (2010) identified systemic primary carnitine deficiency in asymptomatic mothers of children with low carnitine detected by newborn screening. |Shibbani et al. (2014) reported 8 patients from 5 Lebanese families with primary carnitine deficiency who had an exclusive cardiac phenotype. Two of the families had been reported by Yamak et al. (2007). Seven patients presented with cardiac failure due to cardiomyopathy between ages 8 months and 10 years; an 11-month-old affected twin sib of 1 of the patients had cardiomyopathy but was asymptomatic. A literature review of 61 cases of the disorder, including the 8 Lebanese patients, showed that cardiomyopathy is the most common clinical presentation, with 42.6% of patients having cardiac manifestations only, and 62.3% having cardiac plus other phenotypes. These findings suggested that heart muscle is more susceptible to carnitine deficiency than liver or skeletal muscle, most likely due to its constant need for energy expenditure and dependence on fatty acids. While carnitine levels were associated with type of mutation, there was no correlation between carnitine levels and severity of the phenotype. Shibbani et al. (2014) suggested that environmental stress, such as recurrent infection, may also contribute to the disease manifestations. |
212138::carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency (CACTD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SLC25A20 (613698) gene on chromosome 3p21.|Carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive metabolic disorder of long-chain fatty acid oxidation. Metabolic consequences include hypoketotic hypoglycemia under fasting conditions, hyperammonemia, elevated creatine kinase and transaminases, dicarboxylic aciduria, very low free carnitine and abnormal acylcarnitine profile with marked elevation of the long-chain acylcarnitines. Clinical features include neurologic abnormalities, cardiomyopathy and arrhythmias, skeletal muscle damage, and liver dysfunction. Most patients become symptomatic in the neonatal period with a rapidly progressive deterioration and a high mortality rate. However, presentations at a later age with a milder phenotype have been reported (summary by Rubio-Gozalbo et al., 2004). |In a newborn male infant who developed seizures, apneic periods, and bradycardia at 36 hours of age, Stanley et al. (1992) discovered a deficiency of the carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase (CACT) that transfers fatty acylcarnitines into mitochondria in exchange for free carnitine. The attack was apparently provoked by fasting. He had recurrent premature ventricular contractions, ventricular tachycardia, and hypotension. Subsequently, fasting during intercurrent illnesses provoked several episodes of coma, which responded to intravenous administration of glucose. At 30 months of age, the child had generalized weakness of skeletal muscles. Electrocardiogram showed mild ventricular hypertrophy and echocardiogram showed reduced ejection fraction. He died at 37 months of age of increasing weakness, hepatomegaly, and reduced liver function. The parents were nonconsanguineous and healthy. An older brother had died at 4 days of age, 2 days after a sudden, unexplained cardiorespiratory arrest. Pande et al. (1993) described CACT deficiency with severe hypoketotic hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, and auriculoventricular block in a male, with healthy first-cousin parents, who died at age 8 days. A total deficiency of CACT was found in fibroblasts by use of the carnitine acetylation assay. |Brivet et al. (1994) identified CACT deficiency in a patient with impaired long-chain fatty acid (LCFA) oxidation by complementation analysis in cultured fibroblasts. Restoration of release of tritiated water from labeled palmitate was used as a criterion for complementation. The 'case' consisted of premature dizygotic twins, both affected. On the second day of life, they both displayed neurologic deterioration associated with hyperammonemia without hypoglycemia. At 2 months, both displayed acute decompensation within the days following the introduction of a normal diet with nocturnal fast. The deterioration was associated with hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, huge dicarboxylic aciduria, and hypocarnitinemia. From a clinical point of view, both children had intracardiac conduction defects, hepatomegaly, and liver insufficiency. Despite supportive care, they died within a few days. |Niezen-Koning et al. (1995) described an affected child who was the second born in a family in which the first child was probably affected, having died of cardiorespiratory insufficiency 24 hours postpartum. The patient presented at 36 hours postpartum with sudden cardiorespiratory insufficiency, extreme hypoglycemia (glucose not detectable), high potassium, and hyperammonemia. Treatment with carnitine and a low-fat diet supplemented with medium-chain triglycerides were instituted. The patient gradually developed microcephaly with progressive enlargement of the liver and heart. The patient died at 24 months of age. Autopsy demonstrated hypertrophic cardiomegaly and storage fat in liver and striated muscle fibers. The CACT activity in fibroblasts was very low. |Brivet et al. (1996) reported the sudden death of a 2-month-old boy, the fifth child of healthy, unrelated parents. The family history was highly suggestive of an LCFA oxidation defect: 2 sibs had died at 24 and 48 hours of life, respectively. Brivet et al. (1996) assessed the acylcarnitine profile in the blood spots of the fifth child's Guthrie card by tandem mass spectrometry 3 years after the baby's death and found accumulation of long-chain acylcarnitine species. The finding suggested a CACT or carnitine palmitoyltransferase (CPT) II deficiency (see 255110). CACT activity was determined in both lymphocytes and fibroblasts from the parents and the 2 healthy sibs. The results suggested a carrier status for a CACT deficiency. CPT II activity was normal in the parents and the 2 healthy sibs, confirming the diagnosis of a CACT deficiency. |Olpin et al. (1997) found 6 previous reports of CACT deficiency, all of them showing a severe phenotype with very low or undetectable enzyme activity and very low beta-oxidation flux. All of these patients had a fatal outcome, most of them in the neonatal period, although 1 child survived for 3 years with early medical intervention. On the other hand, Olpin et al. (1997) described the case of a 15-month-old Pakistani child, the offspring of first-cousin parents, who was admitted to hospital following a prolonged clonic convulsion. Plasma glucose was very low and his urine contained no ketones. His condition improved rapidly with intravenous glucose. He was placed on a high-carbohydrate, low-fat diet with frequent feeds and supplementary L-carnitine, with the recommendation that he should not fast for more than 6 hours. At the age of 2 years his growth and development were normal. His cardiac function, as measured by ultrasonography, had remained normal throughout. CACT activity was measured at 6% of controls and mean residual beta-oxidation activity in lymphocytes and fibroblasts was 16%. The residual enzyme activity presumably accounted for the mild phenotype. |Morris et al. (1998) reported carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency in a consanguineous Pakistani family. The fifth child died at 3 months of age. The sixth child died at 2 days of age. Autopsy of this child revealed steatosis of the myocardium, liver, and renal tubules. Urine organic acid analysis showed elevated lactate, dicarboxylic, and hydroxydicarboxylic acids with no ketones. The seventh child was electively admitted to the neonatal unit, breast fed every 3 hours, and given supplemental formula by nasogastric tube. At 3 years of age, the child was physically and developmentally normal with normal echocardiogram, but with mild abnormalities on electromyography of the deltoid. Enzyme assay showed approximately 5% CACT activity. The authors attributed the mild course to residual enzyme activity, but noted that the degree of neonatal lipolysis was another important determinant of the clinical outcome. |Fukushima et al. (2013) reported 2 unrelated Japanese infants who died of CACT deficiency. One presented at age 2 days with decreased respiratory function, repeated apnea, hypotonia, irritability, oliguria, hypoglycemia, liver dysfunction, and cryptogenic rhabdomyolysis. Plantar blood spots showed an abnormal acylcarnitine profile, consistent with CACT deficiency. The patient died of Reye-like symptoms at age 2 years, 9 months. The other child became cyanotic and flaccid and went into cardiac arrest on day 2 of life; he died the next day. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis of acylcarnitines in a postmortem blood spot card showed increases in C14, C16, and C18 acylcarnitines. |Pande and Murthy (1994) and Rubio-Gozalbo et al. (2004) provided reviews of CACT deficiency. |
212200::Perry et al. (1967) described 2 unrelated children with a progressive neurologic disorder characterized by severe mental defect and myoclonic seizures. Both excreted carnosine (see 609064) in the urine, even when all source of the dipeptide was excluded from the diet. Both had unusually high concentrations of homocarnosine in the cerebrospinal fluid. When fed a dietary source of anserine, the children excreted anserine in the urine but not its hydrolysis product, methylhistidine. Perry et al. (1967) suggested that one, and perhaps both, had a defect in carnosinase (see 609064) activity. One child, of German and Dutch ancestry, was the offspring of first-cousin parents. The other child was of Chinese ancestry. |Perry et al. (1968) found that the enzyme of normal human serum that hydrolyzes the dipeptides carnosine and anserine into their constituent amino acids was almost absent in the 2 patients. No comment was made on the level of enzyme in the parents. Carnosine is a dipeptide of alanine and histidine. |Scriver et al. (1968) commented on the possible relationship of the mental retardation that occurs with hyper-beta-carnosinemia and phenylketonuria (261600). |In the case of the affected Dutch child reported by Heeswijk et al. (1969), the parents were consanguineous and showed decreased serum carnosinase activity. |Terplan and Cares (1972) reported another family with this rare anomaly. Two brothers, aged 7 and 4, had died. A 6-year-old sister was normal but had chemical changes. The parents have low carnosinase activity. Autopsy on the older boy showed severe axonal degeneration, numerous 'spheroids' in the gray matter, demyelinization, fibrosis, and loss of Purkinje fibers. |Willi et al. (1997) reported the case of a 30-month-old girl with hypotonia, developmental delay, and tremor who, although consuming nominal quantities of meat, excreted large amounts of carnosine and anserine. A strict meat-free diet ameliorated, but did not eliminate, these abnormalities. Serum carnosinase activity was found to be extremely low. |
212750::a susceptibility to celiac disease-1 (CELIAC1) has been found to be genetically determined by possession of specific HLA-DQ alleles (see 146880 and 604305) on chromosome 6p21.3; this region has been designated CELIAC1.|Celiac disease, also known as celiac sprue and gluten-sensitive enteropathy (GSE), is a multifactorial disorder of the small intestine that is influenced by both environmental and genetic factors. It is characterized by malabsorption resulting from inflammatory injury to the mucosa of the small intestine after the ingestion of wheat gluten or related rye and barley proteins (summary by Farrell and Kelly, 2002). Long regarded as gastrointestinal disorder of childhood, the disease is now considered to be a chronic systemic autoimmune disease and is more often diagnosed in adults than in children (Monsuur et al., 2005). |For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of celiac disease, see MAPPING.|In individuals with celiac disease, ingestion of gluten leads to inflammation and tissue remodeling of the intestinal mucosa, resulting in malnutrition and severe complications (summary by Monsuur et al., 2005). |Because of anecdotal accounts of an association between celiac disease and epilepsy with cerebral calcifications that resembled those of Sturge-Weber syndrome (185300), Gobbi et al. (1992) studied 43 patients: 31 patients with cerebral calcifications of unexplained origin and epilepsy underwent intestinal biopsy, and 12 patients with celiac disease and epilepsy underwent computed tomography. Of the first series, 24 were identified as having CD on the basis of flat intestinal mucosa; 15 of 22 had a high concentration of serum antigluten. Of the 12 patients in the second series, 5 showed cerebral calcifications, giving a total of 29 cases with the combination of CD, epilepsy, and cerebral calcifications (CEC). In 27 of the 29, calcifications were located in the parietooccipital regions. Only 2 patients of the first series had gastrointestinal symptoms at the time of intestinal biopsy; however, most patients had recurrent diarrhea, anemia, and other symptoms suggestive of CD in the first 3 years of life. The epilepsy in CEC patients was poorly responsive to antiepileptic drugs. Gluten-free diet beneficially affected the course of epilepsy only when started soon after epilepsy onset. Cases of 'atypical Sturge-Weber syndrome' (characterized by serpiginous cerebral calcifications and epilepsy without facial port-wine nevus) should be reviewed for possible celiac disease, and CD should be ruled out in all cases of epilepsy and cerebral calcifications of unexplained origin. |Maki and Collin (1997) noted that in some cases of celiac disease, extraintestinal symptoms such as dermatitis herpetiformis (DH; 601230) and neurologic symptoms are also present. |Fasano (2003) listed the atypical clinical manifestations of celiac disease, which include osteoporosis, chronic fatigue, irritable bowel, and miscarriage. |Farrell and Kelly (2002) reviewed all aspects of celiac sprue. |
300352::cerebral creatine deficiency syndrome-1 (CCDS1) is caused by mutation in the creatine transporter gene (SLC6A8; 300036) on chromosome Xq28.|Cerebral creatine deficiency syndrome-1 is an X-linked disorder of creatine (Cr) transport characterized by mental retardation, severe speech delay, behavioral abnormalities, and seizures. It has a prevalence of 0.3 to 3.5% in males. Carrier females may show mild neuropsychologic impairment (summary by van de Kamp et al., 2011). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Cerebral Creatine Deficiency Syndrome|See also CCDS2 (612736), caused by mutation in the GAMT gene (601240) on chromosome 19p13, and CCDS3 (612718), caused by mutation in the AGAT gene (GATM; 602360) on chromosome 15q21.|Salomons et al. (2001) reported a male patient with developmental delay and hypotonia. Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging (H-MRSI) of his brain revealed absence of the creatine signal. However, creatine in urine and plasma was increased, and guanidinoacetate (see 612718) levels were normal. Fibroblasts from the index patient were defective in creatine uptake. Three female relatives had mild biochemical abnormalities and learning disabilities. |Bizzi et al. (2002) reported a child with severe neurologic disturbances including seizures, behavioral problems, speech delay, and inability to engage in structured play, as well as creatine deficiency. H-MRSI showed absence of creatine in the whole brain, which was not corrected by creatine supplementation. |Hahn et al. (2002) described a family in which 5 males in a sibship of 10 had mental retardation with seizures. Head circumference was normal in all. Adult height (162.5-167.5 cm) was less than the adult height of the unaffected brother (175.5 cm). Midface hypoplasia was also described. Gastrointestinal disturbances in the form of chronic constipation, megacolon, gastric and duodenal ulcer disease, and bowel perforation were also observed. Two sisters had mild cognitive impairment, and one of them had chronic behavioral disturbances. Biochemical analyses confirmed a defect in creatine metabolism in this family. In affected males patients, the level of urinary creatine was substantially increased, and creatine uptake in fibroblasts was decreased. |Schiaffino et al. (2005) reported a patient with X-linked creatine deficiency confirmed by genetic analysis (300036.0006). The patient was first seen at age 21 months for failure to thrive, recurrent vomiting, and motor delay. His weight, length, and head circumference were all under the third percentile. Neurologic examination showed truncal hypotonia, impaired eye-hand coordination, and severe cognitive and language retardation. EEG showed slow, diffuse hypersynchronisms with abnormal multifocal spikes. Plasma creatine levels were consistently low, and biochemical studies on fibroblasts showed impaired creatine uptake. Schiaffino et al. (2005) noted that few patients with SLC6A8 deficiency had been described, precluding a definite clinical description. However, most affected males have mental retardation, seizures, and language impairment. |Kleefstra et al. (2005) described 2 brothers with X-linked creatine deficiency, in whom Rosenberg et al. (2004) had identified a missense mutation in the SLC6A8 gene (300036.0007). The older brother, born with severe mental retardation, was examined at age 70 and found to have myopathic facies with ptosis, external ophthalmoplegia, and open, hanging mouth. The younger brother had milder mental retardation and learned to read and write, but underwent regression at age 51 after the death of their father. In his fifties, he had urethral stenosis, chronic constipation, and ileus, and spontaneous luxations of several digits occurred. Neurologic examination at age 67 showed apparent medication-related Parkinsonism, upward gaze paresis, expressionless face, and hanging mouth and shoulders; comparison of photographs at age 57 and 64 revealed the striking progression of clinical features in the latter patient. Their sister, a carrier of the mutation, had short stature, learning difficulties, and developed severe constipation requiring surgical intervention in her fifties. |Clark et al. (2006) reported 6 unrelated males with X-linked mental retardation associated with mutations in the SLC6A8 gene. Clinical features included increased urinary creatine:creatinine (Cr:Crn) ratio, microcephaly, long, narrow face, and prominent chin. Two patients were tall and thin, and 3 had short stature. |Battini et al. (2007) reported a 9.5-year-old Italian boy with moderate mental retardation and verbal dyspraxia associated with mutation in the SLC6A8 gene. He had delayed psychomotor development, hypotonia, seizures, and severe language deficit with oral-motor dyspraxia, irritability, and temper tantrums. Detailed language evaluation showed problems in picture naming and phonetics, whereas receptive vocabulary was less severely affected. Social interaction was good despite the severe expressive limitation. |Battini et al. (2011) reported a 6.5-year-old boy with X-linked creatine deficiency syndrome confirmed by genetic analysis. In infancy, he showed poor feeding, hypotonia, and delayed psychomotor development with walking and speaking his first words at age 3 years. Examination at age 5 years showed mild intellectual disability and comparatively severe language delay with mild oromotor dyspraxia and clumsiness. Social interaction was good. Detailed neuropsychologic studies showed a discrepancy between nonverbal and verbal skills, with mild impairment of social personal performance and eye-hand coordination and moderate impairment of speech and practical reasoning. Spontaneous language performance was markedly reduced. Biochemical analysis showed increased urinary Cr, increased Cr/Crn ratio, and undetectable uptake of Cr in fibroblasts, and magnetic resonance spectroscopy showed a reduced Cr peak in the brain. The patient's mother, who also carried the mutation, had a normal biochemical profile, but borderline intellectual functioning with difficulties in reading comprehension. |Comeaux et al. (2013) reported 22 patients with confirmed deleterious mutations in the SLC6A8 gene who had clinical information available. Clinical features included developmental delay (86%), seizures (27%), autistic features (18%), speech delay (27%), ataxia (14%), and choreoathetosis (9%). All 6 patients with MRS results had decreased or absent creatine peaks. |Van de Kamp et al. (2013) performed a retrospective analysis of 101 male patients from 85 families with X-linked creatine transporter deficiency confirmed by genetic analysis. Many of the patients had previously been reported. All patients presented in infancy or early childhood, most often due to delayed psychomotor development. All had intellectual disability of varying degrees, and 85% had behavioral problems. Speech development was especially delayed, but almost a third of patients could speak in sentences. Other features included seizures (59%), hypotonia (40%), spasticity (26%), gastrointestinal symptoms (35%), and ophthalmologic abnormalities (10%). Various facial dysmorphic features were present in 45%. MRI showed mild structural abnormalities in 53 of 76 patients studied, and MRS showed reduced creatine in all 66 patients for whom results were available. Urinary creatine was increased in 81 patients for whom results were available. A few patients studied had unexpectedly high creatine levels in CSF, suggesting that the brain is able to synthesize creatine and that the creatine deficiency is caused by a defect in the reuptake of creatine within neurons. Most patients had missense mutations or deletions of 1 amino acid in the SLC6A8 gene. A third of patients had a de novo mutation in the SLC6A8 gene. However, van de Kamp et al. (2013) suggested that a mother with an affected son with a de novo mutation may have a recurrence risk in further pregnancies due to the possibility of low level somatic or germline mosaicism. |Van de Kamp et al. (2011) studied 8 unrelated female carriers of SLC6A8 mutations identified though affected male relatives. One woman had mental retardation, 1 required special education, 3 failed a year during elementary school, and 3 had no learning difficulties. IQ scores ranged from 48 to 96; 2 had scores in the mental retardation range, and 4 had scores in the borderline range. MRI showed mild cerebellar symptoms in 2, and constipation was reported in 2. Only 3 of 8 women had a mildly elevated urine creatine/creatinine ratio. H-MRSI studies showed decreased total creatine concentrations in the brain overall, but individual females had levels overlapping that of controls. X-inactivation studies in cultured fibroblasts showed severely skewed patterns in 2 woman, 1 favoring the mutant allele and 1 favoring the wildtype allele, but this may have been an artifact. Van de Kamp et al. (2011) concluded that carrier females may have mild symptoms of the disorder, and suggested that the most accurate diagnostic strategy in females should be molecular diagnosis, as biochemical changes may be subtle or not present. |
612736::cerebral creatine deficiency syndrome-2 (CCDS2), also known as guanidinoacetate methyltransferase (GAMT) deficiency, is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the GAMT gene (601240) on chromosome 19p13.|Guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency, an autosomal recessive inborn error of creatine synthesis, is characterized by developmental delay/regression, mental retardation, severe disturbance of expressive and cognitive speech, intractable seizures and movement disturbances, severe depletion of creatine/phosphocreatine in the brain, and accumulation of guanidinoacetic acid (GAA) in brain and body fluids (summary by Schulze, 2003). For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of CCDS, see CCDS1 (300352).|Stockler et al. (1994) reported a 22-month-old male infant with muscular hypotonia, progressive extrapyramidal movement disorder, an extremely low excretion of creatine, deficiency of creatine and creatine phosphate, and simultaneous accumulation of guanidinoacetate in brain, as detected by in vivo proton and phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The clinical symptoms and biochemical abnormalities improved significantly after oral administration of creatine monohydrate. The observations suggested an enzyme defect in creatine biosynthesis at the level of GAMT activity. Stockler et al. (1996) studied a second patient, aged 4 years, with similar biochemical and spectroscopic findings and severe developmental delay, muscular hypotonia, ataxia, and intractable seizures as the predominant clinical symptoms. Deficiency of GAMT in liver was demonstrated. |Schulze et al. (1997) reported findings in a female infant born of first-cousin Kurdish parents. She had psychomotor retardation at age 2.5 years. At 3 years she began to lose acquired skills. From 14 months she had intractable grand mal and absence seizures. This child also exhibited dyskinetic and dystonic involuntary movements and pyramidal signs including increased muscle tone of the lower limbs, increased deep tendon reflexes, and myoclonic jerks. MRI revealed marked myelination delay. Plasma creatinine was in the low normal range, and 24-hour creatinine excretion was markedly reduced. Urinary excretion of guanidinoacetic acid was greatly increased. In this infant, creatine therapy did not influence the course of epilepsy and its sequelae. |Caldeira Araujo et al. (2005) investigated 180 institutionalized patients with a severe mental handicap for urine and plasma uric acid and creatinine. Patients with an increased urinary uric acid/creatinine ratio and/or decreased creatinine were subjected to the analysis of guanidinoacetate. Four patients were identified with GAMT deficiency: 2 sisters, aged 26 and 29 years, respectively, and their 8-year-old male third cousin, and an isolated case in an unrelated family who was 19 years old at the time of report. A fifth patient had died before a biochemical diagnosis could be made. All patients had shown normal psychomotor development in the first year of life, after which they developed profound mental retardation. Three of 4 had convulsions and all 4 totally lacked the development of speech. Their GAMT activity in lymphoblasts was impaired. Caldeira Araujo et al. (2005) concluded that GAMT deficiency in adults is associated with severe mental retardation and absent or limited speech development; convulsions may be prominent. |
612718::cerebral creatine deficiency syndrome-3 (CCDS3), also known as arginine:glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency, is caused by homozygous mutation in the GATM gene (602360) on chromosome 15q21.|Cerebral creatine deficiency syndrome-3 is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by developmental delay/regression, mental retardation, severe disturbance of expressive and cognitive speech, and severe depletion of creatine/phosphocreatine in the brain (Schulze, 2003). Most patients develop a myopathy characterized by muscle weakness and atrophy later in life. Oral creatine supplementation can offer symptom improvement (summary by Edvardson et al., 2010). For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of cerebral creatine deficiency syndrome, see CCDS1 (300352).|Bianchi et al. (2000) reported 2 female sibs, aged 4 and 6 years, with mental retardation and severe creatine deficiency in the brain. GAMT (601240) enzyme activity was normal. Urinary guanidinoacetate concentrations were low, suggesting a deficiency of AGAT. Treatment with oral creatine promptly increased the level of cerebral creatine, which was paralleled by a favorable clinical response, as shown by significant improvement of highly abnormal developmental scores. |Battini et al. (2006) reported an affected 5-year-old cousin of the sisters reported by Bianchi et al. (2000). At age 2 years he presented with psychomotor and language delay and autistic-like behavior. He was found to have severe creatine deficiency in the brain. Creatine monohydrate supplementation normalized creatine levels and resulted in clinical improvement. |Edvardson et al. (2010) reported 2 sibs, born of unrelated Yemenite Jewish parents, with cerebral creatine deficiency syndrome. Both showed delayed psychomotor development and failure to thrive in infancy. At ages 18 and 12 years, respectively, both had mental retardation and decreased muscle mass and strength, mainly proximal, associated with increased serum creatine kinase. Both fatigued easily and refrained from sports. The older sib had high-arched palate, long fingers, and pes cavus. Muscle biopsies showed slight preponderance of type 2 fibers and tubular aggregates. Respiratory chain complex activities were variably decreased. Urinary guanidinoacetate (GAA) levels were significantly decreased, and brain MRS showed decreased creatine signals. Treatment with oral creatine resulted in some clinical improvement and increased cerebral creatine levels. |Verma (2010) reported 2 Jordanian sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with CCDS3. Both showed delayed development in early childhood. At 18 to 20 years, both also developed progressive proximal muscle weakness with features of a myopathy. Muscle biopsy of 1 patient showed fiber size variation and slight atrophy of type 1 and type 2 fibers. Laboratory studies showed undetectable GAA levels. Treatment with oral creatine supplementation resulted in dramatic improvement of muscle strength, but speech and cognitive impairment were unchanged. Genetic analysis identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the GATM gene (R169X; 602360.0003). |Ndika et al. (2012) reported a 9-year-old Chinese girl with CCDS3. She had delayed motor development and hypotonia in infancy and later showed poor overall growth. Laboratory studies yielded generalized organic aciduria, markedly reduced urinary and plasma GAA, and low serum creatine. AGAT enzyme activity was undetectable in cultured lymphoblasts. Early and intense treatment with creatine supplementation resulted in significant developmental progress, with advanced academic performance, but average verbal skills. |Nouioua et al. (2013) reported 2 sisters, aged 11 and 6 years, with CCDS3. They had moderately delayed psychomotor development, language delay, and progressive proximal muscle weakness with Gowers sign and myopathic features on EMG. Laboratory studies showed undetectable guanidinoacetate and low levels of creatine in plasma and urine. Brain MRS showed a markedly reduced level of creatine. Treatment with oral creatine resulted in dramatic improvement in muscle strength and mild improvement in language and cognitive functions. Genetic analysis identified a homozygous missense mutation in the GATM gene (Y203S; 602360.0005). |
613068::neurodegeneration due to cerebral folate transport deficiency is caused by mutation in the FOLR1 gene (136430) on chromosome 11q13.|This is an autosomal recessive disorder resulting from brain-specific folate deficiency early in life. Onset is apparent in late infancy with severe developmental regression, movement disturbances, epilepsy, and leukodystrophy. Recognition and diagnosis of this disorder is critical because folinic acid therapy can reverse the clinical symptoms and improve brain abnormalities and function (Steinfeld et al., 2009). |Steinfeld et al. (2009) reported 2 German sibs with severe neurodegeneration beginning after age 2 years. The older boy, at age 3 years and 19 months, was severely handicapped, wheelchair-bound, and suffered from resistant epileptic seizures. After treatment with oral folinic acid, the frequency and severity of epileptic seizures declined, and the boy started to walk with support. His younger sister, by 2 years, was treated with folinic acid directly after the onset of her first motor symptoms at the age of 2 years and 3 months. She completely recovered and has not developed clinical symptoms since then. Steinfeld et al. (2009) reported a third girl with this disorder from a small Italian village. At age 5 years, she was severely handicapped, mentally retarded, and suffered from frequent epileptic seizures, at which point she was diagnosed as having cerebral folate transport deficiency. After oral folate treatment, her clinical condition slowly improved. CSF methyltetrahydrofolate (MTHF) concentrations were severely decreased in all 3 patients, and increased during folinic acid treatment. Brain MRI of the 2 severely affected patients showed severely disturbed myelination affecting the periventricular and subcortical white matter. Brain MRS showed decreased choline and inositol peaks in the parietooccipital white matter. The younger sister of the German boy had similar but milder abnormalities that normalized after treatment.|
213700::cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the CYP27A1 gene (606530), which encodes sterol 27-hydroxylase, on chromosome 2q35.|Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis is a rare inherited lipid-storage disease characterized clinically by progressive neurologic dysfunction (cerebellar ataxia beginning after puberty, systemic spinal cord involvement and a pseudobulbar phase leading to death), premature atherosclerosis, and cataracts. Large deposits of cholesterol and cholestanol are found in virtually every tissue, particularly the Achilles tendons, brain, and lungs. Cholestanol, the 5-alpha-dihydro derivative of cholesterol, is enriched relative to cholesterol in all tissues. The diagnosis can be made by demonstrating cholestanol in abnormal amounts in the serum and tendon of persons suspected of being affected. Plasma cholesterol concentrations are low normal in CTX patients.|Dotti et al. (2001) examined the ophthalmologic findings of 13 CTX patients. In addition to cataracts, which were found in all cases, optic disc pallor was identified in 6 of the patients. Premature retinal senescence was also observed. |In a tabular presentation, Moghadasian et al. (2002) compared and contrasted CTX with 2 other lipid disorders with certain similarities and clinical course: familial hypercholesterolemia (143890) and sitosterolemia (210250). |Van Bogaert et al. (1937) described affected cousins. Onset was at age 12 or 13 years. When examined in their 30s, the patients demonstrated cerebellopyramidal signs, myoclonus of the soft palate, mental debility, cataracts, xanthelasmata, and tendon xanthomata. At autopsy many deposits were found in the white matter of the cerebellum and the cerebral peduncles. Philippart and Van Bogaert (1969) gave follow-up on a member of the first family described by Van Bogaert et al. (1937). Menkes et al. (1968) described brother and sister, aged 60 and 57 years, respectively. The brother had slowly progressive ataxia in later years. Cataracts were removed in his 20s and he had enlarged Achilles tendons from childhood. Serum cholesterol was normal. He died of myocardial infarction. The cerebellar white matter was demyelinated and contained cholesterol deposits. The sister had had progressive enlargement of Achilles tendons, minimal mental retardation, and unsteadiness of gait. Bilateral cataracts were removed at age 24 years. Serum cholesterol was normal. Menkes et al. (1968) speculated that the defect concerns transport of cholesterol out of cells. Cholesterol can be synthesized in many tissues but oxidation is virtually limited to the liver. Whereas tendon xanthomata and cataracts may appear early, neurologic impairment may be a late development. |Harlan and Still (1968) described black brother and sister with multiple tendinous and tuberous xanthomas despite plasma lipids that were quantitatively and qualitatively normal. Evidence of xanthomatous involvement of the lungs was found in the male. The authors suggested that normolipemic xanthomatosis is a distinct entity inherited as an autosomal recessive and that it should be classified as a reticuloendotheliosis. Swanson (1968) suggested that normolipemic xanthomatosis is the same entity as cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. Although neurologic manifestations were not evident, these may be late in appearing. |Cruysberg et al. (1991) suggested that bilateral juvenile cataract associated with chronic diarrhea may represent the earliest clinical manifestations of CTX. They described a 6-year-old girl, her 12-year-old brother, and another unrelated 12-year-old boy. |Dotti et al. (1994) described the CT and MR findings in brain and spinal cord of 10 patients with cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis. All patients were aged 35 years or older and had cerebral and/or cerebellar atrophy. The majority had focal lesions distributed through the cerebrum, cerebellum, brainstem, or basal nuclei. Some of these lesions appeared to be xanthomata. |Verrips et al. (1999) described 7 Dutch patients from 6 families with a slowly progressive, mainly spinal cord syndrome that existed for many years before the classic CTX symptomatology became manifest. The diagnoses were confirmed by biochemical and MRI findings and mutation assays of the CYP27A1 gene. The authors concluded that spinal xanthomatosis should be included in the differential diagnosis of chronic myelopathy. Early recognition of this myelopathy is important since effective therapy is available. |Sugama et al. (2001) reported a 44-year-old woman with progressive frontal lobe dementia and spastic paraplegia. Examination revealed increased serum levels of cholestanol with abnormal cholesterol metabolism and a heterozygous mutation (arg441 to gln; 606530.0005) of the sterol 27-hydroxylase gene. While biochemical findings were compatible with the diagnosis of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, the clinical manifestations were very dissimilar. |Clayton et al. (2002) reviewed the medical histories of a group of patients with CTX and found that prolonged neonatal cholestatic jaundice was common. The family histories also revealed fetal and neonatal deaths among sibs of CTX patients. Clayton et al. (2002) concluded that defective activity of cholesterol 27-hydroxylase can lead to neonatal cholestatic jaundice ('hepatitis of infancy'), which may be self-limiting. After a latent period, however, progressive accumulation of cholesterol and cholestanol can lead to the xanthomata, neurodegeneration, cataracts, and atherosclerosis that are typical of CTX. |Guyant-Marechal et al. (2005) reported a 53-year-old man with an unusual CTX phenotype, involving xanthomas since adolescence but no mental retardation, and development of a progressive neuropsychiatric disorder beginning at age 44 that was suggestive of frontotemporal dementia. He had no cataract or ataxia. Despite combination cholesterol-lowering therapy over a 3-year period, his cognitive function continued to decline, although no other signs of neurologic deterioration appeared. |Szlago et al. (2008) reported 2 Argentinian sibs with CTX confirmed by genetic analysis. Both had chronic diarrhea from birth, seizures, mild mental retardation, and developed cataracts in childhood. At 17 years of age, the boy showed palatal myoclonus, dystonic posture, distal tremor, uncoordinated gait, and hyperreflexia. The girl had distal tremor at age 14. Neither patient had tendon xanthomas. Both patients had high plasma levels of cholestanol. Szlago et al. (2008) noted the lack of tendon xanthomas but stated that xanthomas may manifest at a later date in these 2 young patients. |
603956::various genes are involved in the causation of cervical cancer.In the vast majority of cases, invasive carcinoma of the uterine cervix is thought to arise from preinvasive cervical intraepithelial neoplasias, designated CIN I-CIN III, which represent a pathologic continuum from mild to severe epithelial dysplasia. Only some cases of the more dysplastic lesions progress further to invasive carcinoma. Whereas most of the precursor lesions are readily curable, the prognosis for invasive carcinoma is generally poor, making the dissection of the molecular events that cause invasion considerably important. The observations are consistent with models describing a multistep genetic pathway for human tumorigenesis as proposed by Fearon and Vogelstein (1990) for colorectal cancer. Cervical cancer is strongly associated with infection by oncogenic types of human papillomavirus (HPV; see 167959 and 167960), but only a small fraction of those infected develop cancer, indicating that other factors contribute to the progression to cervical cancer.|
600803::In general, gallbladder disease (GBD) is one of the major digestive diseases. GBD prevalence is particularly high in some minority populations in the United States, including Native and Mexican Americans. Gallstones composed of cholesterol (cholelithiasis) are the common manifestations of GBD in western countries, including the United States. Most people with gallstones remain asymptomatic through their lifetimes; however, it is estimated that approximately 10 to 50% of individuals eventually develop symptoms. Significant risk factors associated with GBD are age, female sex, obesity (especially central obesity), lipids, diet, parity, type 2 diabetes (125853), medications, and Mexican American ethnicity. GBD appears to be strongly related to the metabolic syndrome (605552) and/or its major components, such as hyperinsulinism, dyslipidemia, and abdominal adiposity (Boland et al., 2002; Tsai et al., 2004). Infection, specifically by Helicobacter, has been implicated in cholelithiasis and cholecystitis (Silva et al., 2003; Maurer et al., 2005). |Low phospholipid-associated cholelithiasis is a specific form of gallbladder disease characterized by young-adult onset of chronic cholestasis with intrahepatic sludge and cholesterol cholelithiasis. Affected individuals have recurrence of the disorder after cholecystectomy and show a favorable response to treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) (summary by Pasmant et al., 2012). |Mutation in the ABCB4 gene can cause a spectrum of related diseases, including the more severe progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis-3 (PFIC3; 602347), intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy-3 (ICP3; 614972), andoral contraceptive-induced cholestasis (OCIC; see 614972).|Genetic Heterogeneity of Gallbladder Disease|Two major susceptibility loci for symptomatic gallbladder disease have been identified on chromosome 1p in Mexican Americans (GBD2, 609918; GBD3, 609919). In addition, variations in the ABCG8 gene (605460) on chromosome 2p21 confer susceptibility to gallbladder disease (GBD4; 611465).|Rosmorduc et al. (2001) reported 6 adult patients with gallbladder disease. There were 4 women and 2 men, including a mother and son. Common features were adult onset of symptoms related to chronic cholestasis and biliary pain, including biliary colic, pancreatitis, or cholangitis, recurrence of symptoms after cholecystectomy, presence of echogenic material in the intrahepatic bile ducts, and prevention of recurrence with UDCA therapy. One of the women first developed symptoms during pregnancy, consistent with ICP3 (614972), and 1 developed symptoms after beginning oral contraception, consistent with OCIC (see 614972). Another woman developed biliary pain, cholesterol gallstones, and sludge in the gallbladder at age 28 years. UDCA treatment was effective. During her first pregnancy at age 32, UDCA was discontinued. During the 24th week of pregnancy, she developed cholestasis and biliary pain and delivered a premature stillborn fetus. After delivery, the cholestasis and symptoms persisted and she underwent cholecystectomy. However, her symptoms recurred and she had increased liver enzymes and multiple intrahepatic gallstones. Treatment with UDCA resulted in remission, and she had a normal subsequent pregnancy and delivery while on UDCA therapy. A 26-year-old man, born of the woman who developed symptoms during pregnancy, developed acute cholangitis associated with multiple intrahepatic and extrahepatic cholesterol gallstones at age 24. He became free of symptoms after cholecystectomy and treatment with UDCA. An unrelated woman underwent cholecystectomy at age 15 years for cholesterol cholelithiasis. She continued to have recurrent episodes of biliary pain and chronic cholestasis, and received relief with UDCA therapy. A 60-year-old man developed biliary pain with cholestasis at age 55 years and underwent cholecystectomy. Liver biopsy showed portal inflammation, extensive fibrosis, and ductular proliferation, which were thought to be secondary to chronic cholestasis. Hepatic bile composition in 2 patients showed a high cholesterol/phospholipid ratio and cholesterol crystals. |Rosmorduc et al. (2003) identified both heterozygous and homozygous ABCB4 gene mutations in 18 (56%) of 32 patients who presented with clinical criteria specific to LPAC. Three independent clinical features were strongly associated with ABCB4 mutations: recurrence of symptoms after cholecystectomy (odds ratio (OR) of 8.5); intrahepatic hyperechoic foci, intrahepatic sludge, or microlithiasis (OR of 6.1); and age less than 40 years at the onset of symptoms (OR of 3.0). No ABCB4 mutations were detected in 2 other groups of patients with classic cholelithiasis. |Ziol et al. (2008) identified 11 patients, including 2 relatives, with chronic anicteric cholestasis associated with ABCB4 mutations. Six of 11 patients had had biliary symptoms, but only 4 patients met the full criteria for LPAC. The remaining patients were studied because of elevated liver enzymes. One woman had ICP and 2 had oral contraceptive-induced cholestasis. Compared to patients with cholestasis without ABCB4 mutations, patients with mutations had increased hepatic fibrosis, increased ductular reaction, and increased portal infiltration by macrophages on liver biopsy. Mutation carriers also showed decreased immunostaining for ABCB4. Cirrhosis was not observed. Ziol et al. (2008) concluded that unexplained anicteric cholestasis should be added to the spectrum of manifestations associated with ABCB4 mutations. |Pasmant et al. (2012) reported 2 large families with LPAC. In 1 family, the proband presented at age 24 years with intrahepatic cholelithiasis with biliary pain. Despite cholecystectomy, she had recurrence of biliary pain and increased liver enzymes. Treatment with UDCA resulted in complex symptom relief and normalization of liver enzymes. Two paternal relatives had similar symptoms, with a later onset around age 60 years. Liver biopsy in 1 showed carcinoma in situ and bile ductular proliferation. In the second family, the proband presented at age 30 years with cholelithiasis with biliary pain and showed recurrence after cholecystectomy. Her mother, maternal grandmother, and 2 maternal aunts had cholecystectomy before age 40 years. |
211600::progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis-1 (PFIC1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ATP8B1 gene (602397) on chromosome 18q21.|Mutation in the ATP8B1 gene can also cause benign recurrent intrahepatic cholestasis-1 (BRIC1; 243300) and intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy-1 (ICP1; 147480).|Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis is a heterogeneous group of autosomal recessive liver disorders characterized by early onset of cholestasis that progresses to hepatic fibrosis, cirrhosis, and end-stage liver disease before adulthood (Alonso et al., 1994; Whitington et al., 1994; Klomp et al., 2004). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Progressive Familial Intrahepatic Cholestasis|PFIC is a genetically heterogeneous disorder caused by defects in the transport of bile acids. See also PFIC2 (601847), caused by mutation in a liver-specific ATP-binding cassette transporter gene (ABCB11; 603201) on chromosome 2q24; PFIC3 (602347), caused by mutation in the class III multidrug resistance P-glycoprotein gene (ABCB4; 171060) on chromosome 7q21; PFIC4 (615878), caused by mutation in the TJP2 gene (607709) on chromosome 9q12; and PFIC5 (617049), caused by mutation in the NR1H4 gene (603826) on chromosome 12q.|PFIC1 and PFIC2 are associated with mildly elevated or normal serum levels of gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT; see 612346), whereas PFIC3 is associated with high serum GGT levels and liver histology that shows portal inflammation and ductular proliferation in an early stage (Maggiore et al. (1987, 1991)). PFIC4 is associated with normal or mildly increased GGT levels (Sambrotta et al., 2014). PFIC5 is associated with low to normal GGT levels. |There are also several phenotypically similar liver disorders that result from congenital defects in bile acid synthesis. See CBAS1 (607765).|In the Old Order Amish, Clayton et al. (1965, 1969) described a severe form of intrahepatic cholestasis leading to death in the first decade of life. The main clinical features were early onset of loose, foul-smelling stools, jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly, impaired growth with short stature, and in 4 of 6 cases, death between 17 months and 8 years. One mother had extreme pruritus without jaundice in the last trimester of each of 4 pregnancies, consistent with ICP. Two fathers had reduced maximum excretion of sulfobromophthalein. Treatment with cholestyramine, a bile-salt-sequestering exchange resin, reduced the hyperbilirubinemia. Because the bile showed an increased proportion of dihydroxy bile salts as well as the early onset of changes in the stool and the response to cholestyramine, a defect in bile salt metabolism was postulated. |Kaye (1965) studied 3 sibs with intrahepatic cholestasis in which itching predated jaundice, which began by 2 or 3 years of age. One sib died at about 7 years of age and 2 were still alive at ages of about 5 and 10. Cholestyramine had no benefit. These patients were later reported by Williams et al. (1972). The same condition was probably described by Gray and Saunders (1966) in 2 sisters who died under 3 years of age and in a patient reported by Hirooka and Ohno (1968). Toussaint and Gros (1966) reported affected brothers. Landing (1972) suggested that hepatoma may be a terminal event in some patients with PFIC. |De Vos et al. (1975) reported a child with Byler disease. Liver biopsy showed intrahepatic cholestasis, and electron microscopy showed interruptions of the bile canalicular membrane. The findings suggested a primary disturbance in bile acid secretion as the cause of cholestasis. |Kaplinsky et al. (1980) described a brother and sister with pruritus since infancy who developed cholestatic hepatic cirrhosis early in life. Although the boy had Kayser-Fleischer rings, further studies excluded Wilson disease (277900). Determination of the concentrations and patterns of bile acids in the serum indicated a defect in bile acid transport, not bile acid synthesis. Some of the clinical features resembled those described by Jones et al. (1976). Differences from Byler disease were the absence of steatorrhea and physical retardation and survival beyond puberty in 1 sib. |Nielsen et al. (1986) described Byler disease in 16 Greenland Eskimo children. Typical features included jaundice, pruritus, malnutrition, steatorrhea, osteodystrophy, short stature, and hyperbilirubinemia. Eight patients had died between the ages of 6 weeks and 3 years. The pedigrees were consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance. Liver biopsy showed nonspecific cholestatic features (Ornvold et al., 1989). |Whitington et al. (1994) reported 33 patients with PFIC. Symptoms developed almost invariably before 6 months of age with severe pruritus and moderate jaundice. Serum levels of gamma-GGT and cholesterol were not elevated. Twenty-six patients had either partial biliary diversion or orthotopic liver transplantation. Seven patients died at a mean age of 3.9 years from liver failure, hepatocellular carcinoma, or complications of liver transplantation. |Jacquemin et al. (1994) found that total bile acid concentration was decreased in the bile of 7 children with Byler disease compared to children with other cholestatic diseases. Total bile acid concentration in serum was similar between the 2 groups. Jacquemin et al. (1994) concluded that Byler disease is caused by a defect in primary bile acid secretion. |In liver biopsies from 28 patients with PFIC and low GGT1 levels, Alonso et al. (1994) found canalicular cholestasis and disruption of the liver cell plate. Giant cell transformation was present in 56% of initial biopsies. Bile duct loss was a prominent and early finding and many biopsies had abnormal bile duct epithelium. Other features included bridging fibrosis, cirrhosis, and pseudoacinar transformation. Mallory hyaline bodies and hepatocellular carcinoma were observed in some patients with advanced cirrhosis. |Bourke et al. (1996) reported familial cholestasis resembling Byler disease in 8 children in 2 sibships related as first cousins in a highly intermarried group of Irish Travellers, an indigenous Irish nomadic community. The children had a history of neonatal diarrhea, sepsis, and intermittent jaundice that ultimately became permanent. They suffered from intractable pruritus and growth retardation. Despite evidence of severe cholestasis, serum gamma-glutamyltransferase and cholesterol concentrations were normal. Sweat sodium concentrations were raised in 3 children.|Trauner et al. (1998) reviewed the molecular changes in the hepatocellular transport systems in patients with cholestatic disorders. PFIC1 and PFIC2 were associated with low serum gamma-glutamyltransferase concentrations; the concentration of this enzyme was high in PFIC3. |Oshima et al. (1999) described 2 sibs with Byler disease and congenital sensorineural hearing loss. |Klomp et al. (2000) found that liver specimens from 3 Inuit patients with PFIC showed bland canalicular cholestasis. Transmission electron microscopy showed coarsely granular bile similar to that described in Amish patients with the disorder. |
278000::lysosomal acid lipase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the LIPA gene (613497) on chromosome 10q23.|Deficiency of lysosomal acid lipase causes 2 distinct phenotypes in humans: Wolman disease and cholesteryl ester storage disease (CESD). Wolman disease is an early-onset fulminant disorder of infancy with massive infiltration of the liver, spleen, and other organs by macrophages filled with cholesteryl esters and triglycerides. Death occurs early in life. Wolman disease is very rare, with an incidence of less than one in 100,000 live births. CESD is a milder, later-onset disorder with primary hepatic involvement by macrophages engorged with cholesteryl esters. This slowly progressive visceral disease has a very wide spectrum of involvement ranging from early onset with severe cirrhosis to later onset of more slowly progressive hepatic disease with survival into adulthood (summary by Du et al., 2001). |Wolman et al. (1961) described 3 sibs in whom involvement of the viscera was an important feature and death occurred at the age of about 3 months. Xanthomatous changes were observed in the liver, adrenal, spleen, lymph nodes, bone marrow, small intestine, lungs, and thymus, and slight changes were found in the skin, retina, and central nervous system. The adrenals were calcified. Death was thought to be due to intestinal malabsorption resulting from involvement of the gut. The parents, Persian Jews, were cousins. Lipids in the plasma were normal or moderately elevated. Several features suggested that the entity is distinct from hypercholesterolemia and the hyperlipidemias. |Three cases, the first from the United States, were reported by Crocker et al. (1965), who gave no information on ethnicity. The relatively nonspecific clinical picture includes poor weight gain, vomiting, diarrhea, increasing hepatosplenomegaly with abdominal protuberance, and death by nutritional failure by 2 to 4 months of age. Foam cells are found in bone marrow and vacuolated lymphocytes in peripheral blood, as in Niemann-Pick disease (257200). Diffuse punctate calcification of the adrenals is typical. Disseminated foam cell infiltration is found in many organs. Great increases in cholesterol are found in the organs. |Konno et al. (1966) reported a Japanese family with 3 affected sibs. Spiegel-Adolf et al. (1966) reported 3 affected sibs in an American family. |Lough et al. (1970) described an affected infant of Greek ancestry in whom calcified adrenals were demonstrated on the 5th day of life. |Roytta et al. (1992) reported the case of an affected 1-month-old girl on the Aland Islands, the first published Scandinavian example of Wolman disease. Skin biopsy showed cytoplasmic accumulations identical to those noted in 2 Aland Islander sibs who died at the age of about 3 months during the 1950s. Genealogic analyses showed that the 2 families had ancestors from the same restricted area as well as common ancestors during the 17th century. The parents of the 2 affected sibs were born on a small island and were related to each other 'in many different ways.|Jones et al. (2016) reviewed the records of 35 patients with lysosomal lipase deficiency, 26 of whom had early growth failure. Prominent symptom manifestations included vomiting, diarrhea, and steatorrhea. Median age at death was 3.7 months; estimated probability of survival past age 12 months was 0.114 (95% CI, 0.009-0.220). Among patients with early growth failure, median age at death was 3.5 months; estimated probability of survival past age 12 months was 0.038 (95% CI, 0.000-0.112). Treated patients (9 with hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT), 1 with HSCT and liver transplant) in the overall population and the early growth failure subset survived longer than untreated patients, but survival was still poor, with a median age of death of 8.6 months. |Schiff et al. (1968) described cholesterol ester storage disease of the liver in teenage brother and sister whose livers were orange in color. Four younger sibs showed milder changes. The parents were not known to be related. Tissue accumulation of cholesterol esters and triglycerides occurs in both this disease and Wolman disease. The chemical and enzymatic abnormalities are similar. The marked difference in phenotypic expression is unexplained but is comparable to the difference between Hurler (607014) and Scheie (607016) syndromes, the late infantile and adult forms of metachromatic leukodystrophy (see also 607015), and the classic and visceral forms, A and B (607616), respectively, of Niemann-Pick disease. In contrast to Wolman disease, cholesterol ester storage disease is relatively benign; however, in 1 sibship 3 sisters died of acute hepatic failure at the ages of 7, 9, and 17 years (Beaudet et al., 1977). Accumulation of neutral fats and cholesterol esters in the arteries predispose affected persons to atherosclerosis. Hypercholesterolemia is common. Massive hepatomegaly and hepatic fibrosis may lead to esophageal varices. Lysosomal acid lipase A, the enzyme deficient in both Wolman disease and cholesterol ester storage disease, is one of 3 acid lipase isozymes. See lipase B (LIPB; 247980) and C (LIPC; 151670). |Young and Patrick (1970) commented on the existence of cases with the same biochemical and histologic changes as in the acute infantile form (Wolman disease) but with later onset and a much less fulminant course. One of their cases was alive and well at age 8 years, showing no clinical abnormality other than moderate hepatomegaly. The same enzyme is deficient in all these cases. Hence, they suggested the term 'acid lipase deficiency' for the whole group, with Wolman disease as the designation for the acute infantile form. |Besley et al. (1984) reported the first patient observed in Ireland. Then aged 39, with hepatomegaly and sea-blue histiocytes in the bone marrow, the patient had suffered from recurring periods of general malaise and diarrhea since age 21. |Cagle et al. (1986) concluded that patients with CESD are at risk for the development of pulmonary hypertension. Such was recognized in a 15-year-old patient who died at age 18. |
302960::X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia punctata-2 (CDPX2) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding delta(8)-delta(7) sterol isomerase emopamil-binding protein (EBP; 300205) on chromosome Xp11.|Hemizygous mutation in the EBP gene can also cause MEND syndrome (300960) in males, which shares some features with CDPX2.|Chondrodysplasia punctata (CDP) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder characterized by punctiform calcification of the bones. X-linked dominant CDP, also known as Conradi-Hunermann syndrome, is the most well-characterized form. CDPX2 arises almost exclusively in females and is usually lethal in males. In addition to radiographic stippling, the disorder is characterized by rhizomelic shortness, transient congenital ichthyosis following the lines of Blaschko, patchy alopecia, cataracts, and midface hypoplasia. Affected males are extremely rare and the clinical features in males almost always result from postzygotic mosaicism for an EBP mutation (summary by Aughton et al., 2003 and Arnold et al., 2012). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Chondrodysplasia Punctata|See also CDPX1 (302950), caused by mutation in the ARSE gene (300180).|See 118650, 602497, and 118651 for possible autosomal dominant forms of CDP. In addition, CDP can be caused by maternal vitamin K deficiency or warfarin teratogenicity (see 118650).|CDPX2 patients display skin defects including linear or whorled atrophic and pigmentary lesions, striated hyperkeratosis, coarse lusterless hair and alopecia, cataracts, and skeletal abnormalities including short stature, rhizomelic shortening of the limbs, epiphyseal stippling, and craniofacial defects (Derry et al., 1999). |A higher ratio of females to males (36:7) was noted by Spranger et al. (1971) in one type of this disorder, termed type B, and defined as 'moderately affected patients with...asymmetric skeletal changes, occasional cataracts and skin changes.' Because some patients with chondrodysplasia punctata show widespread atrophic and pigmentary lesions of the skin in a linear or whorled pattern, Happle et al. (1977) proposed that these cases may be inherited as an X-linked dominant lethal in hemizygous males. Happle (1979) reviewed 35 cases, all female. The phenotype had mosaic features consistent with lyonization. Bergstrom et al. (1972) described a mother and son with chondrodysplasia punctata. The mother was born with short femora and humeri, the left leg shorter than the right, saddle nose, frontal bossing, flexion contractures at the hips and knees, left talipes equinovarus and hyperkeratosis with erythema of the left side of the body. The son lived only 1 hour. Happle and Kuchle (1983) pictured a sectorial cataract in a woman with X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia punctata and proposed that this reflected lyonization. |Manzke et al. (1980) reported 3 affected girls. Two of their mothers showed a mild form of cicatricial alopecia. The pathognomonic dermatologic findings in the children included erythematous skin changes and striated ichthyosiform hyperkeratosis during the first months of life. Later, patterned ichthyosis, follicular atrophoderma, coarse lusterless hair, and cicatricial alopecia become evident. Manzke et al. (1980) estimated that about one-fourth of reported cases are of the X-linked dominant variety. The X-linked dominant form of chondrodysplasia punctata is lethal in the hemizygous male and, in females, shows a pattern of skin defects consistent with functional X-chromosomal mosaicism; the variability in severity and the marked asymmetry of bone and eye changes may have a similar explanation. Cerebral involvement does not seem to occur. The X-linked recessive form is clinically mild but has cerebral involvement. |Kalter et al. (1989) described a family first identified through the birth of a scaly, erythrodermic female neonate whose mother and maternal great-grandmother had features that allowed the diagnosis to be made. Only after 5 months did the streaky hyperkeratotic pattern characteristic of the disorder appear. Family members bore other stigmata including patchy cicatricial alopecia, coarse hair, follicular atrophoderma, frontal bossing, cataracts, short stature, and short proximal limbs. Decreased peroxisomal enzyme activity was demonstrated on fibroblast cultures. |Sutphen et al. (1995) described a family with Happle syndrome in 3 successive generations. Three of the affected individuals were females: the grandmother, daughter, and granddaughter. The fourth affected individual was a male in the second generation who was found to be severely affected but represented the first known male patient with X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia punctata (see 'Affected Males' below). |Bruch et al. (1995) described the case of a 32-year-old woman with ichthyotic skin lesions that developed during early childhood and persisted into adulthood. Psoriasiform skin changes became evident for the first time during adulthood. Both the ichthyotic and psoriasiform skin lesions followed Blaschko lines. Usually in X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia punctata, punctate epiphyseal calcifications and ichthyotic skin lesions are both transient, resolving during early infancy. The coexistence of the 2 forms of skin change in the adult was unusual. |Kozlowski et al. (2002) presented 2 cases of nonrhizomelic lethal X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia punctata. The mother of 1 of the patients had bone dysplasia consistent with the X-linked dominant form of chondrodysplasia punctata. She had always been smaller than her peers, and spinal curvature, which had been recognized in early childhood, had progressed. By adulthood, she had a gross kyphoscoliosis and was 152 cm in height, with relative truncal shortening. Vertebral wedging was maximal in the lower thoracic spine. The vertebral bodies above and below this region were found to be comparatively normal. The distal end of the left ulna was dysplastic, as was the right femoral head. The left fourth metacarpal was short. A firm diagnosis would not have been possible on the basis of the radiologic findings in the mother alone. In the case of the infant there had been no maternal exposure to embryopathic agents, and, in particular, no warfarin therapy had been given. The infant died at approximately 1 hour of age. |Ausavarat et al. (2008) reported 2 unrelated Thai girls with CDPX2 confirmed by genetic analysis. The first girl presented in infancy with asymmetric limb shortening, flat face, saddle nose, and cataracts. She had hyperkeratotic brownish plaques on the lower extremities following the lines of Blaschko and generalized brownish scales sparing the scalp, face, palms, soles, and inguinal area. Radiographs showed generalized punctate calcifications of the epiphyseal regions of long bones, vertebrae, and the pelvic bone. The second girl first presented at age 13 years. She had short stature, asymmetric limb shortening, postaxial polydactyly, pronounced kyphoscoliosis, dry and scaly skin, sparse hair with areas of alopecia, and cataracts. There were atrophic linear skin lesions following the lines of Blaschko mostly on the extremities. Her mother, who also carried the mutation, had sparse hair and atrophic linear skin lesions following the lines of Blaschko. She did not manifest cataracts, polydactyly, scoliosis, or asymmetric limb shortening. Ausavarat et al. (2008) noted that incomplete penetrance has been reported and suggested that the variable expressivity may reflect different patterns of X inactivation. |Sutphen et al. (1995) reported a man with CDPX2. His survival was attributable to the presence of a 47,XXY karyotype. This affected male died at age 31 years due to restricted pulmonary disease secondary to severe kyphoscoliosis. He attained a height of 147.5 cm after orthopedic surgery. Physical findings showed severe skeletal anomalies, including asymmetric skull with hypoplastic right face, short neck, kyphoscoliosis, shortness of the right upper and lower limbs, short right third digit, and dislocation of the head of the right radius. He also had patchy cicatricial alopecia, right cataract, and right esotropia. Intelligence was borderline; his IQ was 83 at age 5 years and 77 at age 11 years. Although Sutphen et al. (1995) suggested that their male with XXY Klinefelter syndrome was the first known case of Happle syndrome in a man, Happle (1995) pointed to reports of 3 unrelated males with this disorder, at least 2 of whom had chromosome studies showing 46,XY karyotype. Contrasting with the XXY male reported by Sutphen et al. (1995), such cases can best be explained either by postzygotic mutation or by a gametic half-chromatid mutation as proposed for other X-linked dominant traits such as incontinentia pigmenti (Lenz, 1975). |Aughton et al. (2003) reported a 4-year-old boy with mild macrocephaly, scoliosis, rhizomelic shortening of the limbs, epiphyseal and periephiphyseal stippling, butterfly vertebrae, and asymmetry of the femurs. Additional features included coarse, dry hair with spotty scalp alopecia, mild nasal depression, mild midface flattening, and cutaneous linear streaky hypotrophy. He did not have cataracts, and cognition was normal. Laboratory studies showed increased levels of plasma 8-dehydrocholesterol and 8(9)-cholestenol. Genetic analysis showed mosaicism for a missense mutation in the EBP gene (E80K; 300205.0003). |Arnold et al. (2012) reported a 7-year-old boy with a history of transient scaly erythematous lesions on the trunk, extremities, and scalp at birth, which resolved completely leaving linear, hypopigmented, and slightly scaly areas following the lines of Blaschko. He also had patchy alopecia of the scalp and follicular atrophoderma of the knees. No skeletal or ocular abnormalities were noted, and no neurologic abnormalities were reported. Genetic analysis revealed a de novo hemizygous truncating mutation in the EBP gene (Y11X; 300205.0014). Karyotype analysis showed 46,XY, and Arnold et al. (2012) suggested that postzygotic mosaicism had occurred. |
167800::chronic pancreatitis can be caused by mutation in the cationic trypsinogen gene PRSS1 (276000) and the SPINK1 gene (167790). Furthermore, idiopathic pancreatitis has been found to be associated with mutations in the cystic fibrosis gene (CFTR; 602421). A missense variant in the PRSS2 gene (601564.0001) confers protection against chronic pancreatitis. Variants in the chymotrypsin C gene (601405) that diminish activity or secretion are associated with chronic pancreatitis.|Gross et al. (1962) described a kindred with affected persons in 4 generations. Four other families had been reported from the Mayo Clinic, including the first reported example by Comfort and Steinberg (1952). A puzzling feature was the urinary excretion of lysine and cystine by about half the members of affected kindreds (with or without pancreatitis). Cystine urinary stones had not been observed. |Singer and Cohen (1966) reported onset at about age 20 in a man whose younger sister and a cousin were similarly affected. The attacks were characterized by severe abdominal pains, fever, and marked elevation of serum amylase. Except for the last symptom, differentiation from familial Mediterranean fever (249100), also called 'familial paroxysmal peritonitis,' might be difficult. The aminoaciduria was almost certainly an incidental finding since family members without pancreatitis showed it and because other families with pancreatitis have not had this feature (Davidson et al., 1968). |Robechek (1967) observed a family in which 5 individuals had hereditary chronic relapsing pancreatitis, 3 of whom obtained symptomatic relief after sphincterotomy or section of the hypertrophied sphincter of Oddi. Robechek (1967) suggested that hypertrophy of the sphincter of Oddi together with a common ampulla of the biliary and pancreatic ducts may be the inherited factor. Mann and Rubin (1969) described a 17-month-old boy with steatorrhea whose 26-year-old brother and mother had steatorrhea and pancreatic calcification. Hereditary pancreatitis occurs with hyperparathyroidism in the multiple endocrine adenomatosis syndrome (131100). McElroy and Christiansen (1972) described a family in which 10 persons had definite pancreatitis and 16 others may have been affected. They pointed out that thrombosis in the portal or splenic vein occurs with significant frequency. |Sibert (1978) identified 72 patients in 7 families in England and Wales. Penetrance was about 80%. The mean age of onset was 13.6 years. There were 2 peaks, one at 5 years and one at 17 years. The second peak was thought to represent genetically susceptible persons with symptoms precipitated by alcohol, rather than genetic heterogeneity. In 5 of the families, members with both childhood and adult onset were identified. In most cases the attacks were of nuisance value only. Only 4 of the 72 patients had life-threatening disease. Pancreatic insufficiency (5.5%), diabetes mellitus (12.5%), pseudocysts (5.5%) and hemorrhagic pleural effusion were observed. Portal vein thrombosis occurred in 2 and was suspected in 3 others. Patients seemed to improve later in life. Attacks were precipitated by emotional upset, alcohol, or high fat intake. |Sarles et al. (1982) pointed out that chronic calcifying pancreatitis is characterized by pancreatic stones in the ducts and acini. They had shown that 'stone protein' (see 167770) inhibits in vitro calcium carbonate nucleation and decreases the rate of crystal growth, suggesting that it acts as a physiologic inhibitor of spontaneous calcium carbonate formation in supersaturated pancreatic juice. (A similar function has been suggested for statherin in human saliva (Schlesinger and Hay, 1977).) Sarles et al. (1982) found absence of stone protein in the pancreatic stones in a case of calcific pancreatitis and interpreted this as indicating that the protein was not secreted into the pancreatic juice. |Freud et al. (1992) described the cases of monozygotic twin girls of Ashkenazi origin who were admitted to hospital at the age of 9 years because of recurrent attacks of pancreatitis. Dalton-Clarke et al. (1985) found 10 definite and 4 suspected cases of pancreatitis in an English family. Lewis and Gazet (1993) reported pancreatitis in members of 4 successive generations of a second English family. A male in each of the first generations had a combination of calcific pancreatitis and pancreatic carcinoma. |Rumenapf et al. (1994) stated that more than 50 families of hereditary pancreatitis had been reported since the first description by Comfort and Steinberg (1952). They reported on the case of a 26-year-old man from a family in which 6 of 34 members had confirmed pancreatitis and an additional 3 members had suspected pancreatitis. A great uncle had died of pancreatic cancer after suffering from pancreatitis for years. Numerous pancreatic calculi were removed surgically, and a side-to-side pancreaticojejunostomy with a Roux-Y loop was performed. Rumenapf et al. (1994) suggested that surgery may be superior to endoscopic drainage. |Sarles et al. (1996) reported 11 families with hereditary pancreatitis characterized by the presence of calculi in pancreatic ducts. The disorder in 1 family with 5 cases was classified as calcic lithiasis because the calculi were composed of more than 95% calcium salts. Protein lithiasis was present in the other 10 families, the calculi being composed of degraded amorphous residues of lithostathine (167770), the pancreatic secretory protein that inhibits salt crystallization. Average age at clinical onset of symptoms was 15 years. Clinical progression seemed to be less severe than that in alcoholic chronic pancreatitis (alcoholic calcic lithiasis). |Lowenfels et al. (1997) assembled records on 246 patients (125 males and 121 females) thought to have hereditary pancreatitis. In 218 patients the diagnosis appeared to be highly probable and in 28 patients it was thought to be less certain. The mean age of onset of symptoms of pancreatitis was 13.9 +/- 12.2 years. Compared with an expected number of 0.150, 8 pancreatic adenocarcinomas developed during 8,531 person-years of follow-up. The mean age at diagnosis of pancreatic cancer was 56.9 +/- 11.2 years. Frequency of other tumors was not increased. Eight of 20 reported deaths in the cohort were from pancreatic cancer. Thirty members of the cohort had been tested and all were found to have a mutated copy of the trypsinogen gene. The estimated cumulative risk of pancreatic cancer to age 70 years in patients with hereditary pancreatitis approached 40%. For patients with a paternal inheritance pattern, the cumulative risk of pancreatic cancer was approximately 75%. |
530000::Kearns-Sayre syndrome is caused by various mitochondrial deletions.|Kearns (1965) reported 9 unrelated patients with ophthalmoplegia, pigmentary degeneration of the retina, and cardiomyopathy as leading features. Less consistent features were weakness of facial, pharyngeal, trunk and extremity muscles, deafness, small stature, electroencephalographic changes, and markedly increased cerebrospinal fluid protein. In none of the 9 was a positive family history present. Shy et al. (1967) described a 21-year-old black woman with progressive ptosis, external ophthalmoplegia, retinitis pigmentosa, ataxia, absent deep tendon reflexes, elevated cerebrospinal fluid protein, and histologic features compatible with either Hurler syndrome (MPS I; see 607014) or Refsum disease (266500). Neither phytanic acid nor mucopolysaccharide was found in excess in the tissues, however. Hurwitz et al. (1969) described affected brother and sister. They and both parents had amino aciduria which was of uncertain relationship to the myopathy. Clinically the myopathy most resembled that described by Batten and Turner (see congenital myopathy; 255300). Ophthalmoplegia and floppiness also occur with myotubular myopathy (see centronuclear myopathy; 255200), but this entity was excluded by the muscle biopsy in the cases of Hurwitz et al. (1969). Ross et al. (1969) described the association of chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia and complete heart block, and noted 4 earlier reports of the same. Rosenberg et al. (1968) reviewed syndromes involving ophthalmoplegia. |Iannaccone et al. (1974) observed progressive ophthalmoplegia in females in 4 successive generations and demonstrated ragged-red fibers in skeletal muscle from the extremities. Electron microscopy showed subsarcolemmal clusters of mitochondria containing paracrystalline inclusions. Nonfamilial cases were reported by Olson et al. (1972) and others. The great difficulty in classification of cases of external ophthalmoplegia was noted by many authors. Butler and Gadoth (1976) reported a 17-year-old man and found reports of 19 cases in the literature, all of which were sporadic. Berenberg et al. (1977) reviewed 5 new cases and 30 others from the literature. They suggested that a 'persistent viral infection' may be causal. Drachman (1975) gave a classification of disorders associated with progressive external ophthalmoplegia, which he termed 'ophthalmoplegia plus' (Drachman, 1968). Bastiaensen et al. (1978) described 4 patients who had chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia with retinal, neurologic, endocrine, and auditory anomalies. Three had signs of cardiomyopathy, with abnormalities confirmed by histologic study of a cardiac biopsy in one. Biochemical studies showed disturbances in pyruvate and lactate metabolism and in respiratory control. Biopsy of skeletal muscle in all 4 showed aggregates of abnormal mitochondria. The pedigrees of 2 families with many affected members in an autosomal dominant pattern, including several instances of male-to-male transmission, were diagrammed. Bertorini et al. (1978) referred to this condition as 'childhood oculocraniosomatic neuromuscular disease with ragged-red fibers.' Mitochondrial abnormalities were present. In some cases Bertorini et al. (1978) demonstrated the presence of a major, diffuse leukoencephalopathy by means of computerized axial tomography. Robertson et al. (1979) reported an 8-year-old girl who had electron-microscopically abnormal mitochondria in skeletal muscle and, by computerized axial tomography, cerebellar and brainstem atrophy and calcification in the region of the basal ganglia. With the possibility of mitochondrial inheritance in mind, Egger and Wilson (1983) studied the pedigrees of 6 affected families whose members they had examined personally and of 24 families described in the literature. In 27 families maternal transmission occurred exclusively; in 3 there was also paternal transmission in 1 generation. Altogether, 51 mothers and only 3 fathers had transmitted the condition, which the authors referred to as mitochondrial cytopathy. They concluded that mitochondrial inheritance is very likely. |Fine (1978) outlined the characteristics expected of mitochondrial inheritance, based on the fact that the mitochondria are probably derived exclusively from the mother. The complete nucleotide sequence of the mitochondrial chromosome, which might be called man's 25th chromosome or chromosome M, has been determined (Anderson et al., 1981)--all 16,569 basepairs. Lestienne and Ponsot (1988) described a 5-kb deletion in the mitochondrial DNA from muscle of a patient with Kearns-Sayre syndrome. The deletion was observed only in muscle mitochondria and not in DNA from lymphocytes or fibroblasts. The deletion was mapped to the region including the sequence for 4 subunits of complex I, 2 subunits of complex IV and V, and 5-to-8 tRNA genes. Holt et al. (1988) analyzed 25 patients with mitochondrial myopathy associated with various neurologic symptoms, some of which included the ophthalmoplegia and ptosis characteristic of Kearns-Sayre syndrome. Nine cases were found to harbor heteroplasmic deletions OH and OL. Moraes et al. (1989) surveyed mitochondrial encephalomyopathy patients for mitochondrial DNA deletions. Deletions were found in 78% of Kearns-Sayre patients, 56% of chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia-plus patients, but none of the patients with MERRF (545000), MELAS (540000), Leigh syndrome, or infantile mitochondrial myopathy (551000). Egger and Wilson (1983) referred to homochondrial and heterochondrial persons; homoplasmic and heteroplasmic were later preferred terms. Ogasahara et al. (1985) described a KSS patient with reduced levels of coenzyme Q(10) in serum and in the mitochondrial fraction of skeletal muscle. The patient had been well until age 12 when progressive ophthalmoparesis and ptosis were first observed. Bilateral atypical degeneration of the retina and hearing loss were noted at age 18. After administration of coenzyme Q(10), 60-120 mg daily for 3 months, serum levels of lactate and pyruvate became normal, with improvement of a previously existing first-degree atrioventricular block and improvement in ocular movements. Bernal et al. (1986) found clear autosomal recessive inheritance of the Kearns-Sayre syndrome in an inbred kindred in Colombia. Whitaker et al. (1987) restudied the pituitary from one of the cases of Kearns and Sayre (1958) and labeled the patient's disorder as Laurence-Moon syndrome. Jankowicz et al. (1977) reported a father and son with pigmentary retinopathy, chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO), myopathy, and ataxia, associated with a cardiac conduction defect in the son, who had mitochondrial abnormalities on muscle biopsy. A similar but variable spectrum of clinical features was observed by Leveille and Newell (1980) in a pedigree that appeared to support autosomal dominant inheritance. In this family, 1 male with CPEO and limb weakness had a daughter with CPEO, retinopathy, cardiac arrhythmias, and proximal myopathy. The father had ragged-red fibers on muscle biopsy but his daughter did not. Scorza Smeraldi et al. (1983) presented a family with 5 affected in 3 generations and transmission only by females. Close linkage to HLA was excluded. |Moraes et al. (1989) found deletions in muscle mitochondrial DNA of 32 of 123 patients with various mitochondrial myopathies or encephalopathies. All patients had progressive external ophthalmoplegia. Some patients had only ocular myopathy, whereas others had Kearns-Sayre syndrome. Deletions ranged in size from 1.3 to 7.6 kb, but in 11 patients, an identical 4.9-kb deletion was found in the same location. Zeviani et al. (1988) found large-scale deletions in muscle mitochondrial DNA in all 7 patients with KSS studied. Deletions ranged in size from 2.0 to 7.0 kb and did not localize to any single region of the mitochondrial genome. The proportion of mutated chromosomes in each KSS patient ranged from 45 to 75% of total mtDNA. Channer et al. (1988) reported a 21-year-old man in whom the Kearns-Sayre syndrome was associated with rapid development of progressive congestive cardiac failure requiring cardiac transplantation. Rowland et al. (1988) described concordantly affected monozygotic twins with KSS. Johns et al. (1989) found that in each of 4 patients with chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia and a large deletion of mitochondrial DNA, the deletion breakpoint occurred within a directly repeated sequence of 13-18 basepairs, present in different regions of the normal mitochondrial genome. In 2 of the patients the deletions were identical. Partially deleted and normal mitochondrial DNAs were found in all tissues examined, but in very different proportions, indicating that these mutations originated before the primary cell layers diverged. Comparison of the repeated sequences showed a consensus of 11 nucleotides, suggesting involvement of a recombinational event in the development of the deletions.|Larsson et al. (1990) found heteroplasmy for mtDNA deletions in muscle of 3 patients with KSS. The deletions were mapped to the same region of mtDNA but were of different sizes. Two of the 3 deletions may have included nucleotide 8993 which has been demonstrated to be the site of mutation in NARP syndrome (551500; 516060.0001). The same type of deletion could also be detected in fibroblasts in all 3 cases, but the percentage was considerably lower. In 2 cases, the fraction of mtDNA increased with time in muscle and this increase paralleled the progression of the disease. One case spontaneously recovered from an infantile sideroblastic anemia before the development of KSS. The anemia was of the type seen in Pearson marrow-pancreas syndrome (557000). There have been rather numerous examples of children surviving the pancytopenic crisis of Pearson syndrome and subsequently developing progressive symptoms of KSS (Norby et al., 1994). |Poulton et al. (1991) described a patient with Kearns-Sayre syndrome and 2 asymptomatic relatives, the mother and a maternal aunt, all of whom were found to carry the same mtDNA mutation. This was the first report of deletion of mtDNA in the germline. Larsson et al. (1992) described a woman with Kearns-Sayre syndrome and a high percentage of deleted mtDNA in muscle. Although the mtDNA deletion was detected in fibroblasts, bone marrow, and peripheral blood cells by Southern blot analysis, it was detected in all tissues examined when polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used. The patient had healthy parents and 9 healthy sibs. No deleted mtDNA was detected in the blood of the patient's mother. The patient delivered a healthy daughter in whom no mtDNA deletion was detected by PCR. The presence of deleted mtDNA was excluded at a fractional level of less than 1:100,000 in all examined tissues. |Barshop et al. (2000) reported a patient who presented with 2-oxoadipic aciduria and 2-aminoadipic aciduria (204750) at 2 years of age with manifestations typical of organic acidemia, episodes of ketosis and acidosis, progressive to coma. This resolved and the key metabolites disappeared from the urine and blood. At 9 years of age, she developed typical Kearns-Sayre syndrome with complete heart block, retinopathy, and ophthalmoplegia. Southern blot revealed a deletion in the mitochondrial genome. |Puoti et al. (2003) reported a mother and son with KSS who both carried an identical large heteroplasmic mtDNA rearrangement detected in muscle and blood lymphocytes. The rearrangement was present in 2 forms: an mtDNA deletion in skeletal muscle, and a combination of partially deleted and partially duplicated mtDNA molecules in blood. Puoti et al. (2003) emphasized that, although rare, mother-to-offspring transmission of large mtDNA rearrangements is possible. |Pineda et al. (2006) reported a child with an incomplete form of KSS and a large mtDNA deletion. The patient had a profound decrease of cerebrospinal fluid folate levels with normal serum folate levels, suggesting a transport defect across the blood-brain barrier. Oral folinic acid treatment resulted in marked clinical improvement, particularly with regard to near normalization of white matter lesions. |
215700::classic citrullinemia is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ASS1 gene (603470), which encodes argininosuccinate synthetase, on chromosome 9q34.|Severe vomiting spells beginning at the age of 9 months and mental retardation were features of the first reported case, offspring of first-cousin parents; McMurray et al. (1962) found citrulline in very high concentration in serum, spinal fluid, and urine. (The amino acid citrulline gets its name from its high concentration in the watermelon Citrullus vulgaris.) Visakorpi (1962) also described a case of citrullinuria. Ammonia intoxication is another manifestation. The enzyme defect concerns argininosuccinic acid synthetase (EC 6.3.4.5). Tedesco and Mellman (1967) found that the enzyme has an altered Michaelis constant. Most cases of citrullinemia have pursued a severe course with symptoms from birth and death in the neonatal period in more than half of cases. Orotic aciduria is present as well as hyperammonemia. |In Japan, a distinct, late-onset form of citrullinemia has been reported (reviewed by Walser, 1983); see adult-onset citrullinemia (CTLN2; 603471). Significant clinical abnormality had onset in childhood or not until adulthood--age 48 years in 1 case. Symptoms included enuresis, delayed menarche, insomnia, sleep reversal, nocturnal sweats and terrors, recurrent vomiting (especially at night), diarrhea, tremors, episodes of confusion after meals, lethargy, convulsions, delusions and hallucinations, and brief episodes of coma. Delayed mental and physical development was shown by some patients. Most had a peculiar fondness for beans, peas, and peanuts from early childhood and a dislike for rice, other vegetables, and sweets. Since the preferred foods are high in arginine, the dietary predilection of these patients may reflect an arginine deficiency. As the patients get older, episodic disturbances become more frequent and bizarre behavior, including manic episodes, echolalia, and frank psychosis, appears. Citrulline concentrations in the plasma are increased and ASS activity is deficient. The late-onset form is apparently autosomal recessive because sibs have been affected and some of the parents have been consanguineous. The mutation may be allelic to that responsible for the classic form of the disorder. Most of the reports of the late-onset form have appeared in Japanese journals (see Walser (1983) for references). An exception is the report by Matsuda et al. (1976). Also see Scott-Emuakpor et al. (1972) for a similar case reported from the United States. Most adult citrullinemic patients in Japan have a quantitative type of abnormality of ASS (type II). |Issa et al. (1988) described an instructive family with variable severity in the same sibship. A girl showed a severe clinical course attributable to hyperammonemia, whereas identical twin brothers with similar plasma citrulline concentrations were asymptomatic, perhaps due to development of alternative pathways of ammonia metabolism. The similarity in the twins may indicate that the alternative pathways determining interindividual variability are genetically determined. |Gucer et al. (2004) reported a 17-month-old girl with type I citrullinemia who developed early cirrhosis of the liver. She was diagnosed in infancy during investigation of 2 sib deaths and was found to have a homozygous truncating mutation in the ASS gene (603470.0018). From 5 months of age, she showed failure to thrive, several mental and motor retardation, and persistent hepatomegaly with fluctuating transaminase levels. She had 1 hyperammonemic episode precipitated by infection. At 17 months, she presented with lethargy, vomiting, spasticity, and coagulopathy. She died of hyperammonemia and hepatic encephalopathy. Postmortem liver examination showed early cirrhosis without steatosis. Gucer et al. (2004) noted that liver fibrosis and hepatomegaly can occur in late-onset ASS deficiency, but the early presentation in this child was unusual. |In a review of inherited metabolic disorders and stroke, Testai and Gorelick (2010) noted that patients with urea cycle defects, including CPS1 deficiency (237300), OTC deficiency (311250), and citrullinemia can rarely have strokes. |Batshaw et al. (2014) reported the results of an analysis of 614 patients with urea cycle disorders (UCDs) enrolled in the Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium's longitudinal study protocol. The third most common disorder was argininosuccinate synthase deficiency, with 87 cases (14%). Batshaw et al. (2014) found the mortality rate to be 7% in ASS deficiency (neonatal plus late onset). |
603471::adult-onset type II citrullinemia, also known as citrin deficiency, is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SLC25A13 gene (603859) on chromosome 7q21.Neonatal-onset type II citrullinemia (605814) is caused by mutation in the same gene.|Classic citrullinemia (CTLN1; 215700) is a genetically distinct disorder caused by mutation in the gene encoding argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS1; 603470).|Adult-onset type II citrullinemia is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder characterized clinically by the sudden onset of various neuropsychologic symptoms such as disorientation, abnormal behavior, convulsions, and coma due to hyperammonemia. In some cases, rapid progression can lead to brain edema and death if liver transplantation is not possible. Some patients may present with nonalcoholic hepatic steatosis or may develop hepatic fibrosis or hepatocellular carcinoma. Patients with this disorder have a natural aversion to carbohydrates and favor protein, which is in contrast to protein aversion usually observed in patients with urea cycle defects (summary by Komatsu et al., 2008). |In Japan a distinct late-onset form of citrullinemia was reported; see review by Walser (1983). Significant clinical abnormality had onset in childhood or not until adulthood, age 48 years in 1 case. Symptoms included enuresis, delayed menarche, insomnia, sleep reversal, nocturnal sweats and terrors, recurrent vomiting (especially at night), diarrhea, tremors, episodes of confusion after meals, lethargy, convulsions, delusions, hallucinations, and brief episodes of coma. Delayed mental and physical development was shown by some patients. Most had a peculiar fondness for beans, peas, and peanuts from early childhood and a dislike for rice, other vegetables, and sweets. Since the preferred foods are high in arginine, the dietary predilection of these patients may reflect an arginine deficiency. As the patients get older, episodic disturbances become more frequent, and bizarre behavior, including manic episodes, echolalia, and frank psychosis, appears. Citrulline concentrations in the plasma were increased. The late-onset form is apparently autosomal recessive because sibs have been affected and some of the parents have been consanguineous. Most of the reports of the late-onset form appeared in Japanese journals; see Walser (1983) for references. An exception was the report by Matsuda et al. (1976). Also see Scott-Emuakpor et al. (1972) for a similar case reported from the United States. |In the study of adult-onset type II citrullinemia in Japanese, Yasuda et al. (2000) found that the onset of serious and recurring symptoms in CTLN2 varied from age 11 to age 79, with a mean of 34.4 years. Almost all patients suffered from a sudden disturbance of consciousness associated with disorientation, restlessness, drowsiness, and coma, and most died mainly of cerebral edema within a few years of onset. |Komatsu et al. (2008) found that 17 (89%) of 19 patients with genetically confirmed CTLN2 had hepatic steatosis. Four (21%) had been diagnosed with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease before the appearance of neuropsychologic symptoms that are usually characteristic of CTLN2. Hepatic steatosis occurred in the absence of obesity or features of the metabolic syndrome; all patients were lean. Some patients showed hepatic fibrosis, suggesting progression of liver damage. Laboratory abnormalities in CTLN2 patients included citrullinemia, abnormal liver enzymes, low albumin, increased serum triglycerides, and decreased activity of argininosuccinate synthetase. CTLN2 patients had a higher frequency of pancreatitis compared to those without mutations. Increased levels of pancreatic secretory protease inhibitor (PSTI, SPINK1; 167790) were associated with citrin deficiency, which could be a useful method of distinguishing CTLN2 patients from those with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. |Batshaw et al. (2014) reported the results of an analysis of 614 patients with urea cycle disorders (UCDs) enrolled in the Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium's longitudinal study protocol. Citrullinemia type II occurred in 2 patients (0.3%), of whom 1 had the late-onset form and the other the neonatal form. |
605814::neonatal-onset type II citrullinemia, also known as neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency (NICCD), is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SLC25A13 gene (603859).Adult-onset type II citrullinemia (603471) is caused by mutation in the same gene.Classic citrullinemia (CTLN1; 215700) is a genetically distinct disorder caused by mutation in the gene encoding argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS1; 603470).|Neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency (NICCD) is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder characterized by poor growth, intrahepatic cholestasis, and increased serum citrulline. Most patients show spontaneous improvement by 1 year of age. However, some patients may have a progressive course with continued failure to thrive and dyslipidemia caused by citrin deficiency (FTTDCD), and some may develop chronic or fatal liver disease (summary by Song et al., 2011). |Ohura et al. (2001) reported 3 neonates who presented with intrahepatic cholestasis associated with hypermethioninemia or hypergalactosemia detected by a neonatal mass screening. One infant was of average gestational age and had a methionine level of 134 micromol/l. His younger brother, also born at term, manifested liver dysfunction by day 3 of life. The other infant had elevated galactose levels. Plasma amino acid analysis showed significant elevation of citrulline and methionine in all 3 patients. The concentrations of threonine, tyrosine, lysine, and arginine were also 2 to 4 times higher than control levels. Organic acids in 1 patient showed elevation of hydroxyphenyllactic acid and hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid. Succinylacetone was not detected in any patients. Without specific treatment other than feeding with formula containing medium-chain triglycerides or lactose-free formula, all 3 patients had favorable clinical courses. Amino acid profiles were abnormal for the first couple of months, but resolved entirely by 12 months of age. Cholestasis improved by 3 months of age. On follow-up for 18 months to 8 years, all patients were alive and showed no developmental delay or neurologic abnormalities. |Tomomasa et al. (2001) described 2 patients with type II citrullinemia who developed transient hypoproteinemia and jaundice in early infancy. Liver histology showed markedly fatty changes and fibrosis. |Tazawa et al. (2001) described 3 children with neonatal-onset of type II citrullinemia who presented between 1 and 5 months of age with cholestatic jaundice. Liver histology showed fatty tissue without evidence of giant cell hepatitis, the usual finding in most forms of transient neonatal jaundice. |Tamamori et al. (2002) reported 5 patients with neonatal intrahepatic cholestasis caused by citrin deficiency and confirmed by mutation analysis. Four of the patients showed a typical disease course, with spontaneous remission between 5 and 7 months of age. All patients had very high serum levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP; 104150), which the authors attributed to premature hepatocytes and hepatic damage or regeneration. One patient had an unusual disease course with a worsening of liver function at age 6 months, ultimately requiring a living-related liver transplant at 10 months of age. She had normal growth and mental development at age 3 years. The patient was compound heterozygous for 2 previously reported mutations in the SLC25A13 gene (603859.0001; 603859.0002). Tamamori et al. (2002) noted that the same genotype had been identified in a patient with the usual course of spontaneous remission (Ohura et al., 2001), suggesting that the severe phenotype was not due to the genotype. |Naito et al. (2002) described an infant who presented with neonatal hepatitis in association with hypergalactosemia detected by neonatal mass screening. DNA analysis of the SLC25A13 gene identified homozygosity for an intron 11 splice site mutation (603859.0002). Naito et al. (2002) concluded that mutations in the SLC25A13 gene should be suspected in neonatal patients with hypergalactosemia of unknown cause. |Batshaw et al. (2014) reported the results of an analysis of 614 patients with urea cycle disorders (UCDs) enrolled in the Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium's longitudinal study protocol. Citrullinemia type II occurred in 2 patients (0.3%), of whom 1 had the late-onset form and the other the neonatal form. |Most patients with NICCD show clinical improvement between 6 and 12 months of age, and enter what is termed the 'apparently healthy period.' However, some of these patients may develop cirrhosis or severe infections, or may later develop symptoms of adult-onset citrin deficiency (603471). Descriptions of post-NICCD presentations before onset of CTLN2 is limited. Song et al. (2009) described a Chinese child with citrin deficiency who had a novel phenotype consisting of continued failure to thrive and dyslipidemia due to citrin deficiency (FTTDCD) after age 1 year.|Song et al. (2011) evaluated the phenotype of 51 Chinese children with genetically confirmed citrin deficiency, and found that 9 of 34 post-NICCD cases over 1 year of age had concurrent FTTDCD. These patients had higher total bile acid levels, suggesting increased intraphepatic cholestasis. Seven of the 51 were found to have echinocytosis, which was associated with more severe biochemical abnormalities. Delayed hepatic discharge and bile duct/bowel visualization were common scintigraphic findings in the whole cohort. The findings expanded the phenotypic spectrum of citrin deficiency in children. |
277380::methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria of the cblF type (MAHCF) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the LMBRD1 gene (612625) on chromosome 6q13.|Combined methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) and homocystinuria is a genetically heterogeneous disorder of cobalamin (cbl; vitamin B12) metabolism. The defect causes decreased levels of the coenzymes adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl) and methylcobalamin (MeCbl), which results in decreased activity of the respective enzymes methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT; 609058) and methyltetrahydrofolate:homocysteine methyltransferase, also known as methionine synthase (MTR; 156570). Different forms of the disorder have been classified according to complementation groups of cells in vitro: cblC (MAHCC; 277400), cblD (MAHCD; 277410), cblF, and cblJ (MAHCJ; 614857).|Rosenblatt et al. (1985, 1986) reported an infant girl with developmental delay, stomatitis, glossitis, seizures, and minimal methylmalonic aciduria responsive to vitamin B12. There was no megaloblastic anemia or homocystinuria. Like control cells, the patient's fibroblasts accumulated the transcobalamin II-B12 complex within lysosomes and released B12 from the binding protein. However, the patient's cells were defective in the release of cobalamin from the lysosome into the cytoplasm. The cells also showed indirect evidence of methylmalonyl-CoA mutase and methionine synthase activity, as well as inability to synthesize AdoCbl and MeCbl. No abnormality of lysosomal structure was detected by electron microscopy. After incubation in labeled vitamin B12, accumulation was found in lysosomes (Vassiliadis et al., 1991). Like Salla disease (604369) and cystinosis (219800), this disorder appeared to result from impeded egress (efflux) from lysosomes. Rosenblatt et al. (1986) suggested that the disorder be called cblF, cobalamin F disease. In vitro studies showed that the patient's fibroblasts complemented the other known groups of methylmalonic aciduria (Watkins and Rosenblatt, 1986). |Shih et al. (1987, 1989) reported a female infant with failure to thrive, developmental delay, minor facial anomalies, stomatitis, skin rashes, macrocytosis, homocystinuria, and methylmalonic acidemia. In vitro studies showed decreased synthesis of AdoCbl and MeCbl, and accumulation of unmetabolized free cobalamin. Treatment with hydroxocobalamin resulted in clinical and biochemical improvement, but sudden death occurred at 5 months of age. |MacDonald et al. (1992) reported 2 unrelated males with cblF. The older patient had recurrent stomatitis during infancy, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis at age 4 years, and a reticulate pigmented skin abnormality at age 10.|Rutsch et al. (2009) reported 12 unrelated patients with cblF. Frequent clinical findings included being small for gestational age, poor feeding, failure to thrive, developmental delay and persistent stomatitis. Two individuals had minor facial abnormalities, including pegged teeth and bifid incisors, and 4 had congenital heart defects. Other common features included macrocytic anemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and pancytopenia. Affected individuals were identified by elevated homocysteine and methylmalonic acid concentrations in blood or urine samples, although 3 patients were identified by increased propionylcarnitine concentrations detected by newborn screening. The diagnosis of the cblF defect was established by complementation analysis on fibroblasts. |
607426::primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency-1 (COQ10D1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the COQ2 gene (609825), which encodes parahydroxybenzoid-polyprenyltransferase, on chromosome 4q21.|Primary CoQ10 deficiency is a rare, clinically heterogeneous autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutation in any of the genes encoding proteins directly involved in the synthesis of coenzyme Q (review by Quinzii and Hirano, 2011). Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10), or ubiquinone, is a mobile lipophilic electron carrier critical for electron transfer by the mitochondrial inner membrane respiratory chain (Duncan et al., 2009). |The disorder has been associated with 5 major phenotypes, but the molecular basis has not been determined in most patients with the disorder and there are no clear genotype/phenotype correlations. The phenotypes include an encephalomyopathic form with seizures and ataxia (Ogasahara et al., 1989); a multisystem infantile form with encephalopathy, cardiomyopathy and renal failure (Rotig et al., 2000); a predominantly cerebellar form with ataxia and cerebellar atrophy (Lamperti et al., 2003); Leigh syndrome with growth retardation (van Maldergem et al., 2002); and an isolated myopathic form (Lalani et al., 2005). The correct diagnosis is important because some patients may show a favorable response to CoQ10 treatment. |Genetic Heterogeneity of Primary Coenzyme Q10 Deficiency|See also COQ10D2 (614651), caused by mutation in the PDSS1 gene (607429) on chromosome 10p12; COQ10D3 (614652), caused by mutation in the PDSS2 gene (610564) on chromosome 6q21; COQ10D4 (612016), caused by mutation in the COQ8 gene (ADCK3; 606980) on chromosome 1q42; COQ10D5 (614654), caused by mutation in the COQ9 gene (612837) on chromosome 16q21; COQ10D6 (614650), caused by mutation in the COQ6 gene (614647) on chromosome 14q24; COQ10D7 (616276), caused by mutation in the COQ4 gene (612898) on chromosome 9q34; and COQ10D8 (616733), caused by mutation in the COQ7 gene (601683) on chromosome 16p13.|Secondary CoQ10 deficiency has been reported in association with glutaric aciduria type IIC (MADD; 231680), caused by mutation in the ETFDH gene (231675) on chromosome 4q, and with ataxia-oculomotor apraxia syndrome-1 (AOA1; 208920), caused by mutation in the APTX gene (606350) on chromosome 9p13.|Ogasahara et al. (1989) reported 2 sisters with progressive muscle weakness, abnormal fatigability, and central nervous system dysfunction since early childhood. Both sisters developed a learning disability and showed epileptiform abnormalities on EEG, although only the younger sister developed a seizure disorder. The older sister developed progressive cerebellar symptoms at the age of 12 years. Both sisters had lactic acidemia at rest and episodic myoglobinuria. Measurement of skeletal muscle mitochondria coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) in both girls was severely reduced (3.7% and 5.4% of normal), although levels in serum and fibroblasts were normal. The authors postulated a tissue-specific deficiency of CoQ10 in skeletal muscle and brain. Muscle mitochondrial complexes I, II, III, and IV were normal, but activities of complex I-III and complex II-III, both of which require CoQ10 as an electron carrier, were reduced. Although liquid chromatographic analysis did not show accumulation of intermediates of CoQ10 biosynthesis, Ogasahara et al. (1989) suggested that a block in CoQ10 biosynthesis was likely. |Sobreira et al. (1997) reported a patient with delayed motor development, proximal weakness, exertional fatigue, episodic exercise-induced myoglobinuria, and seizures. Serum creatine kinase and lactate were elevated. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed ragged-red fibers, cytochrome c oxidase-deficient fibers, and excess lipid; mitochondrial CoQ10 concentration was less than 25% of normal. |Boitier et al. (1998) reported a boy with delayed motor development, proximal weakness, elevated creatine kinase, cerebellar ataxia, seizures, mild pigmentary degeneration of the retina, and elevated serum and CSF lactate. Muscle biopsy showed ragged-red fibers, abnormal mitochondria, and lipid droplets. The patient had markedly decreased skeletal muscle mitochondria CoQ10 content (6% of normal). |Di Giovanni et al. (2001) reported 2 brothers with myopathic 'partial' CoQ10 deficiency (39% and 35% of normal). |Rotig et al. (2000) reported a family in which 3 affected sibs had CoQ10 deficiency in multiple tissues, affecting multiple organ systems in addition to skeletal muscle and CNS. A boy developed nephrotic syndrome resulting in renal failure and necessitating kidney transplant, progressive ataxia, generalized amyotrophy, retinitis pigmentosa, bilateral sensorineural deafness, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. He was wheelchair-bound by age 12 years. An older sister had a severe form of the disorder, with symptoms similar to her brother, and died at age 8 years after rapid neurologic deterioration. Another sister had sensorineural deafness, nystagmus, ataxia, mild mental retardation, and nephrotic syndrome with glomerular sclerosis. Biochemical activity analysis indicated CoQ10 deficiency in lymphocytes and fibroblasts, and direct measurement detected no CoQ10 in fibroblasts. Further analysis showed a specific defect in the ability to synthesize CoQ10, which prompted Rotig et al. (2000) to examine trans-prenyltransferase (PDSS1; 607429), the enzyme that elongates the prenyl side-chain of the quinone. However, sequence analysis of PDSS1 failed to detect a disease-causing mutation. |Musumeci et al. (2001) reported 6 patients, 3 of whom were sibs, with similar clinical features including cerebellar ataxia, cerebellar atrophy, and muscle CoQ10 deficiency that was responsive to CoQ10 supplementation. Variable findings included seizures, cognitive impairment, myoclonus, weakness, and scoliosis. CoQ10 concentration in muscle ranged from 26 to 35% and in fibroblasts from 54 to 71%, both of which were significantly decreased from controls. In the 3 sibs with cerebellar ataxia, cerebellar atrophy, and muscle CoQ10 deficiency that was responsive to CoQ10 supplementation reported by Musumeci et al. (2001), Quinzii et al. (2005) identified a mutation in the aprataxin gene (APTX; 606350.0006), consistent with ataxia-oculomotor-apraxia syndrome (AOA; 208920). The CoQ10 deficiency was believed to be secondary in these patients. Quinzii et al. (2005) found that 2 other patients reported by Musumeci et al. (2001) and 11 additional patients with CoQ10 deficiency did not have mutations in the APTX gene, suggesting that it is not a common cause of CoQ10 deficiency. |Van Maldergem et al. (2002) reported 2 sisters with facial dysmorphism who had axial hypotonia and failure to thrive in infancy. Other phenotypic characteristics included mental retardation, abnormal gait, spasticity, hyperreflexia, muscle atrophy, elevated lactic acid, and hypersignals in the caudate and putamen in 1 patient. They were both given a diagnosis of Leigh syndrome (256000). Supplementation with CoQ10 resulted in marked clinical improvement. Investigation revealed markedly decreased muscle CoQ10 levels: 5% in 1 sister before treatment and 60% in the other during treatment. Lymphoblasts from both sisters showed 50% reduction of CoQ10. Van Maldergem et al. (2002) suggested that CoQ10 deficiency can present as Leigh syndrome. |Lamperti et al. (2003) detected marked CoQ10 deficiency in 18 of 135 muscle biopsies from patients with genetically undefined cerebellar ataxia. Thirteen of the patients developed ataxia affecting the trunk, limbs, and speech by age 10 years; some had onset in infancy. Variable associated features included seizures, developmental delay, mental retardation, pyramidal signs, myoclonus, and ophthalmoparesis. The disease course was progressive. All patients showed cerebellar atrophy on MRI, and most had normal muscle biopsies. |Gironi et al. (2004) reported 2 brothers with late-onset CoQ10 deficiency at ages 39 and 30, respectively, characterized by cerebellar ataxia, muscle cramps, exercise intolerance, and memory impairment. Brain imaging showed cerebellar atrophy. In addition, both patients had hypergonadotropic hypogonadism with decreased serum testosterone, decreased luteinizing hormone, and increased follicle-stimulating hormone. Treatment with oral CoQ10 supplementation resulted in improvement of symptoms. |Lalani et al. (2005) reported a boy with exercise intolerance, ragged-red fibers, and muscle CoQ10 deficiency (46% of normal), but without myoglobinuria or central nervous system involvement. Treatment with CoQ10 supplementation resulted in significant clinical improvement. The case expanded the clinical spectrum of the disorder. |Patients with Demonstrated Mutations in the COQ2 Gene|Salviati et al. (2005) reported a 33-month-old boy with infantile encephalomyopathy, nephropathy, and deficiency of coenzyme Q10. The disease appeared to be an autosomal recessive trait because the patient's parents were first cousins and his 9-month-old sister with nephropathy also had coenzyme Q10 deficiency in fibroblasts. The proband presented with proteinuria at age 12 months; a renal biopsy revealed focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis. Neurologic evaluation showed hypotonia, mild psychomotor delay, and optic atrophy. After the demonstration of coenzyme Q10 deficiency and initiation of CoQ10 supplementation, the neurologic manifestations improved dramatically. |Diomedi-Camassei et al. (2007) reported 2 unrelated children with CoQ10 deficiency who manifested with severe early-onset nephrotic syndrome. The first patient was a 22-month-old boy of Eastern European origin who developed rapidly progressive steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome at age 18 months and began peritoneal dialysis. Renal biopsy showed podocyte hypertrophy and collapsing glomerulopathy. The tubulointerstitial compartment showed extensive microcyst formation, focal tubular atrophy, and interstitial fibrosis. Ultrastructural examination showed podocytes that had extensive foot process effacement and contained abnormal mitochondria. He had no sign of neuromuscular involvement. The second patient was a 6-month-old Italian boy who presented in the neonatal period with nephrotic syndrome. Renal biopsy showed crescentic glomerulonephritis. At age 3 months, he developed drug-resistant seizures, status epilepticus, and encephalopathy, leading to an unresponsive state, respiratory failure, and death at age 6 months. Brain MRI showed stroke-like lesions and cerebral atrophy. He also had increased CSF lactate. An older sister had died at age 18 hours of metabolic acidosis and respiratory distress. Both patients had decreased CoQ10 and decreased activity of mitochondrial complex II+III in renal cortex and skeletal muscle. |Mollet et al. (2007) reported a French family with CoQ10 deficiency due to mutation in COQ2 that manifested in 2 sibs as fatal infantile multiorgan disease including anemia, pancytopenia, liver failure, and renal insufficiency. Enzymologic analysis showed low quinone-dependent oxidative phosphorylation activity in affected members, and CoQ10 deficiency was confirmed by restoration of oxidative phosphorylation activity after quinone addition. |
614654::primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency-5 (COQ10D5) is caused by homozygous mutation in the COQ9 gene (612837) on chromosome 16q13.For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency, see COQ10D1 (607426).|Rahman et al. (2001) reported a boy, the seventh child of healthy unrelated Pakistani parents, who presented in the first day of life with poor feeding, hypothermia, and seizures. There was a possible history of reduced fetal movements in the last trimester. Physical examination showed a passive neonate, unresponsive to his immediate environment, with a weak cry. He had generalized increased peripheral tone with decreased truncal tone. He also had lactic acidosis, renal tubulopathy, and mild left ventricular hypertrophy with global hypokinesia. MRI of the brain showed generalized cerebral and cerebellar atrophy and abnormal parenchyma. Muscle biopsy at 10 months of age showed CoQ10 deficiency. Family history revealed that 5 older sibs were healthy, but another sib had died on day 1 of life with seizures, aminoaciduria, and acidosis. The mother had previously had 5 first-trimester miscarriages. |Danhauser et al. (2016) reported a male infant, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, with COQ10D5. He was born at 36 weeks' gestation due to anhydramnion. He was small for gestational age and showed poor respiratory effort, hypotonia, bradycardia, and severe lactic acidosis. Cranial ultrasound showed multiple choroid plexus cysts and abnormal signals in the basal ganglia, suggesting a neonatal Leigh-like syndrome. He had reduced spontaneous movements with intermittent opisthotonus, seizures, and recurrent episodes of apnea, and died at 18 days of age. Patient fibroblasts showed reduced activity of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex II/III and decreased CoQ10; histologic analysis of muscle and liver biopsy were unremarkable. |
114500::mutations in several different genes have been identified in colorectal cancer (CRC).|Colorectal cancer is a heterogeneous disease that is common in both men and women. In addition to lifestyle and environmental risk factors, gene defects can contribute to an inherited predisposition to CRC. CRC is caused by changes in different molecular pathogenic pathways, such as chromosomal instability, CpG island methylator phenotype, and microsatellite instability. Chromosome instability is the most common alteration and is present in almost 85% of all cases (review by Schweiger et al., 2013).|Genetic Heterogeneity of Colorectal Cancer|Mutations in a single gene result in a marked predisposition to colorectal cancer in 2 distinct syndromes: familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP; 175100) and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC; see 120435). FAP is caused by mutations in the APC gene (611731), whereas HNPCC is caused by mutations in several genes, including MSH2 (609309), MLH1 (120436), PMS1 (600258), PMS2 (600259), MSH6 (600678), TGFBR2 (190182), and MLH3 (604395). Epigenetic silencing of MSH2 results in a form of HNPCC (see HNPCC8, 613244). Other colorectal cancer syndromes include autosomal recessive adenomatous polyposis (608456), which is caused by mutations in the MUTYH gene (604933), and oligodontia-colorectal cancer syndrome (608615), which is caused by mutations in the AXIN2 gene (604025).|The CHEK2 gene (604373) has been implicated in susceptibility to colorectal cancer in Finnish patients. A germline mutation in the PLA2G2A gene (172411) was identified in a patient with colorectal cancer.|Germline susceptibility loci for colorectal cancer have also been identified. CRCS1 (608812) is conferred by mutation in the GALNT12 gene (610290) on chromosome 9q22; CRCS2 (611469) maps to chromosome 8q24; CRCS3 (612229) is conferred by variation in the SMAD7 gene (602932) on chromosome 18; CRCS4 (601228) is conferred by variation on 15q that causes increased and ectopic expression of the GREM1 gene (603054); CRCS5 (612230) maps to chromosome 10p14; CRCS6 (612231) maps to chromosome 8q23; CRCS7 (612232) maps to chromosome 11q23; CRCS8 (612589) maps to chromosome 14q22; CRCS9 (612590) maps to 16q22; CRCS10 (612591) is conferred by mutation in the POLD1 gene (174761) on chromosome 19q13; CRCS11 (612592) maps to chromosome 20p12; and CRCS12 (615083) is conferred by mutation in the POLE gene (174762) on chromosome 12q24.|Somatic mutations in many different genes, including KRAS (190070), PIK3CA (171834), BRAF (164757), CTNNB1 (116806), FGFR3 (134934), AXIN2 (604025), AKT1 (164730), MCC (159350), MYH11 (160745), PARK2 (602544), and RNF43 (612482), have been identified in colorectal cancer.|Colon cancer is a well-known feature of familial polyposis coli. Cancer of the colon occurred in 7 members of 4 successive generations of the family reported by Kluge (1964), leading him to suggest a simple genetic basis for colonic cancer independent of polyposis. The combination of colonic and endometrial cancer has been observed in many families (e.g., Williams, 1978). |Sivak et al. (1981) studied a kindred with the familial cancer syndrome in which every confirmed affected member had at least 1 primary carcinoma of the colon. The average age at which cancer appeared was 38 years. Multiple primary neoplasms occurred in 23% of cancer patients. |Budd and Fink (1981) reported a family with a high frequency of mucoid colonic carcinoma. Since endometrial carcinoma, atypical endometrial hyperplasia, uterine leiomyosarcoma, bladder transitional carcinoma, and renal cell carcinoma also occurred in the family, this may be the same disorder as the Lynch cancer family syndrome type II (120435). |Bamezai et al. (1984) reported an Indian Sikh kindred in which 8 persons suffered from cancer of the cecum, not associated with polyposis. |Burt et al. (1985) studied a large Utah kindred called to attention because of occurrence of colorectal cancer in a brother, a sister, and a nephew. No clear inheritance pattern was discernible until systematic screening was undertaken for colonic polyps using flexible proctosigmoidoscopy. One or more adenomatous polyps were found in 41 of 191 family members (21%) and 12 of 132 controls (9%)--p less than 0.005. Pedigree analysis showed best fit with autosomal dominant inheritance. Cannon-Albright et al. (1988) extended the studies with investigations of 33 additional kindreds. The kindreds were selected through either a single person with an adenomatous polyp or a cluster of relatives with colonic cancer. The kindreds all had common colorectal cancers, not the rare inherited condition of familial polyposis coli or nonpolyposis inherited colorectal cancer. Likelihood analysis strongly supported dominant inheritance of a susceptibility to colorectal adenomas and cancers, with a gene frequency of 19%. According to the most likely genetic model, adenomatous polyps and colorectal cancers occur only in genetically susceptible persons; however, the 95% confidence interval for this proportion was 53 to 100%. |Ponz de Leon et al. (1992) analyzed data on 605 families of probands with colorectal cancer in the province of Modena in Italy. Among the 577 presumed nonpolyposis cases, both parents had colorectal cancer in 11, one parent in 130, and neither parent in 436. Segregation was compatible with dominant transmission of susceptibility to cancer. |Mecklin (1987) investigated the frequency of hereditary colorectal cancer among all colorectal cancer patients diagnosed in 1 Finnish county during the 1970s. The cancer family syndrome type of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma emerged as the most common verifiable risk factor, involving between 3.8 and 5.5% of all colorectal cancer patients. The frequencies of familial adenomatosis and ulcerative colitis were 0.2% and 0.6%, respectively. The observed frequency is probably an underestimate. The patients with cancer family syndrome were young, accounting for 29 to 39% of the patients under 50 years of age, and their tumors were located predominantly (65%) in the right hemicolon. |
614265::combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria (CMAMMA) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ACSF3 gene (614245) on chromosome 16q24.|Ozand et al. (1994) reported 2 sibs with CMAMMA but normal malonyl-CoA decarboxylase activity (see 248360). |Gregg et al. (1998) reported a patient with combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria who excreted much larger amounts of methylmalonic acid (MMA) than malonic acid (MA). He had normal malonyl-CoA decarboxylase activity. The patient, 6 years old at the time of the report, was born at 34 weeks' gestation to nonconsanguineous parents. At 2 months he was hospitalized for diarrhea, vomiting, and dehydration and had recurrent similar episodes throughout the first year, necessitating placement of a gastric tube for failure to thrive. He had apnea and pneumonia at 2 months of age; he had episodes of tachypnea at 2 years. He was hospitalized for clonic seizures at age 2, at which time a routine urine organic acid analysis revealed CMAMMA. |Sloan et al. (2011) studied 9 patients with CMAMMA, 6 of whom were evaluated at the United States National Institutes of Health (NIH). Age at evaluation ranged from 16 months to 66 years. Four patients had adult onset with neurologic manifestations, including seizures, memory problems, psychiatric disease, and/or cognitive decline, without vitamin B12 deficiency. Five subjects presented during childhood with symptoms suggestive of an intermediary metabolic disorder (coma, ketoacidosis, hypoglycemia, failure to thrive, elevated transaminases, microcephaly, dystonia, axial hypotonia, and/or developmental delay). Methylmalonic and malonic aciduria with urinary MMA/MA ratio greater than 5 was present in 7 of the 9 subjects. The characteristic pattern of biochemical and genetic testing results in these subjects showed elevated serum MMA but normal serum B12, acylcarnitines, total homocysteine, malonyl-CoA decarboxylase activity, 1-C14-propionate incorporation, malonyl-CoA decarboxylase genetic testing, and sequencing of known methylmalonic acidemia genes. Plasma malonic acid levels were markedly elevated in 6 subjects in whom it was measured, ranging from 2- to greater than 10-fold increases. |
614702::combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency-10 (COXPD10) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the MTO1 gene (614667) on chromosome 6q13.|COXPD10 is an autosomal recessive disorder resulting in variable defects of mitochondrial oxidative respiration. Affected individuals present in infancy with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and lactic acidosis. The severity is variable, but can be fatal in the most severe cases (summary by Ghezzi et al., 2012). For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency, see COXPD1 (609060).|Ghezzi et al. (2012) reported 2 Italian sibs, born of unrelated parents, with fatal infantile hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Both patients showed reduced fetal growth. The first presented soon after birth with lactic acidosis and severe hypoglycemia. Electroencephalogram (EEG) and cerebral, hepatic, and splenic echography were normal. Interventricular septum hypertrophy of the heart was detected on the fifteenth day of life, and he died of sudden bradycardia on day 19. Skin fibroblasts showed a reduction of mitochondrial complex III (60% of control) and complex IV (56%) of control. The patient's younger sister had severe metabolic acidosis at birth with increased blood lactate. Treatment with biotin, coenzyme Q10, thiamine, and dichloroacetate (DCA) resulted in stabilization. She became tachycardic on day 7, but heart ultrasound did not show abnormalities until day 38, when hypertrophy of the septum and left ventricular wall were seen. She died of sudden bradycardia on day 40. Autopsy showed cardiomegaly, pleural effusion, and ascites. Muscle tissue showed decreased complex I and complex IV activity (both 27% of control), whereas fibroblasts showed only decreased complex I activity. An unrelated boy from northeastern Italy had a similar disorder with a better outcome. At age 1 month, he presented with poor feeding, hyperpnea, weakness, and lack of ocular fixation. Physical examination showed hepatomegaly, lactic acidosis, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with reduced left ventricular function. Muscle tissues showed reduced activities of complex I (12% of control) and complex IV (30%). Treatment with DCA resulted in marked improvement of both metabolic acidosis and cardiomyopathy. After 9 months of DCA therapy, a cardiac ultrasound examination showed a normal-sized heart, with normal left ventricular wall thickness and function, and low blood lactate. He showed good growth and normal neurologic development in childhood, and DCA was stopped at age 12 years. Muscle biopsy at 17 years showed severe reduction of complex I (7%) and complex IV (35%). Cardiac evaluation at age 19 years showed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with an ejection fraction of 60% and sinus bradycardia. Neurologic examination was normal except for a small reduction of fine movements and optic atrophy. |Baruffini et al. (2013) reported 5 patients from 3 unrelated families with COXPD10 manifest as infantile cardiomyopathy and lactic acidosis. Three patients presented at birth or in the first days of life with poor feeding, hypotonia, and failure to thrive, whereas 2 sibs presented in the first months of life with cardiomyopathy. One patient had Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (194200). The disease course was highly variable: 2 sibs died at ages 3 and 12 months, whereas 2 other sibs and an unrelated girl were alive in their teens with stable cardiac disease. The 3 patients who survived were treated aggressively with dichloroacetate (DCA) to control severe lactic acidosis. The 3 patients who survived developed psychomotor delay and other variable neurologic features, such as poor speech, dystonia, spasticity, and seizures. Brain MRI of 2 patients showed abnormal hyperintensities in deep brain structures. Patient-derived muscle samples and fibroblasts showed variable decreases of complex I and IV as well as overall defects in mitochondrial respiration. |O'Byrne et al. (2018) identified and reviewed 35 cases of COXPD10 through international collaboration. The most common features at presentation were lactic acidosis, present in 21 (62%) of 34 cases, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, present in 15 (44%) of 34 cases. Eventually lactic acidosis developed in all cases, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was described in 27 (79%) of 34 patients with this disease. Global developmental delay and/or intellectual disability were present in 28 of 29 (97%), feeding difficulties in 17 (49%) of 35, failure to thrive in 12 (34%) of 35, seizures in 12 (34%) of 35, optic atrophy in 11 (52%) of 21 cases. Ataxia was present in 7 (21%) of 34. The average age at presentation was 10.2 months (range, day 1 to 8.0 years). |
614922::combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency-11 (COXPD11) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the RMND1 gene (614917) on chromosome 6q25.|COXPD11 is a severe multisystemic autosomal recessive disorder characterized by neonatal hypotonia and lactic acidosis. Affected individuals may have respiratory insufficiency, foot deformities, or seizures, and all reported patients have died in infancy. Biochemical studies show deficiencies of multiple mitochondrial respiratory enzymes (summary by Garcia-Diaz et al., 2012). For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency, see COXPD1 (609060).|Ferreiro-Barros et al. (2008) reported a male infant, born of consanguineous Saudi Arabian parents, with severe neonatal encephalopathy resulting in death at age 18 months. The infant was unresponsive at birth, but was successfully resuscitated and intubated. He had little spontaneous limb movement and required mechanical ventilation. Physical examination showed tongue fasciculations, equinus deformities of the feet, and profound limb hypotonia with absent reflexes. He developed myoclonic jerks at age 3 days. Laboratory studies showed increased serum and CSF lactate. EEG was severely abnormal with diffuse signal attenuation, low amplitude, and slow activity consistent with postanoxic encephalopathy. Brain MRI showed signs of immaturity with prominence of the cortical sulci, possible pachygyria of the anterior frontal and temporal lobes, and hypomyelination. Muscle biopsy showed diffuse mitochondrial complex IV deficiency with low-normal activities of mitochondrial complexes I+III and II+III. There were reductions in the steady-state of complexes I, IV, and V, whereas complex II was normal and complex III was increased. Immunoblot analysis in patient cells showed a decrease of mitochondrial proteins, consistent with a defect in mitochondrial protein synthesis. Sural nerve biopsy revealed sparse myelinated nerve fibers, indicating severe loss of fibers and endoneural fibrosis consistent with a peripheral neuropathy. Fusion of patient cells with normal nuclear DNA complemented the defect, indicating that it was of nuclear origin. The diagnosis was profound neonatal encephaloneuromyopathy with cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiency. Family history revealed an older sister with congenital arthrogryposis, short neck, breathing problems, breech presentation, and hypoventilation requiring intubation and mechanical ventilation. |Garcia-Diaz et al. (2012) provided follow-up of the family reported by Ferreiro-Barros et al. (2008) and reported 4 additional affected family members. Three infants presented with severe neonatal encephaloneuromyopathy at birth and showed lethargy, respiratory failure, profound floppiness, hyporeflexia or areflexia, equinus deformities, lactic acidosis, and death in the first year of life, whereas the fifth affected individual was stillborn and did not have skeletal deformities. Fibroblast studies of 1 patient confirmed deficiencies in multiple mitochondrial respiratory chain enzymes. |Janer et al. (2012) reported a female infant, born of consanguineous parents, with encephalopathy and lactic acidosis. She was normal at birth, but developed seizures on day 6 and had severe hypotonia requiring tube feeding. At 4 months of age, she had unremitting seizures and her head circumference was not increasing; she died at age 5 months. Laboratory studies showed increased serum and CSF lactate, and cultured fibroblasts showed severely decreased cytochrome c oxidase activity. There were also assembly defects in complexes I, III, IV, and V, suggesting a mitochondrial translation defect. Postmortem examination showed marked cortical atrophy, and atrophic cord, ventricular dilation, and a thin corpus callosum. Microscopic analysis showed widespread vacuolation of cortical gray matter and status spongiosus, and extensive loss of myelin in the brainstem. Family history revealed an older sister who developed intractable seizures at 2 months of age and died at age 13 months. Brain CT scan showed cerebral atrophy and microcephaly. |Taylor et al. (2014) reported 5 unrelated children, born of consanguineous British Pakistani parents, with COXPD11. The patients developed symptoms in infancy, and 2 died. All patients had muscle involvement and deafness; additional features included central nervous system, renal, and cardiac involvement. Patient cells showed deficiencies of mitochondrial respiratory complexes I, III, and IV. A sixth patient with a similar disorder was also reported. |Janer et al. (2015) reported a boy, born of unrelated Caucasian parents, with COXPD11. He had failure to thrive with severe feeding difficulties in the first month of life and presented with epileptic encephalopathy and lactic acidosis at age 8 weeks. Laboratory studies showed lactic acidosis, anemia, hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, and hypertension. Echocardiogram showed mild left ventricle hypertrophy secondary to high blood pressure. He developed progressive renal failure and by age 3 years, he had end-stage renal tubulopathy. He had delayed psychomotor development with absent language, hearing loss, and seizures. Brain imaging showed T2-weighted signal abnormalities in the white matter and delayed myelination. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed decreased activities of mitochondrial respiratory complexes I, III, IV, and V, suggestive of a mitochondrial translation defect. The patient died at 4 years of age: postmortem examination showed hypoplastic kidneys with cysts and focal medullary calcification, enlarged liver with microvesicular steatosis and absent glycogen, and nodular adrenal glands. |Ravn et al. (2016) reported 2 sisters, born of unrelated parents, with a slightly milder form of COXPD11 and longer survival. The patients were 17 and 13 years of age. Both had progressive renal failure and underwent successful renal transplantation, which may have contributed to the survival. The girls had failure to thrive in infancy, hypotonia, hearing impairment, and intellectual disability. One patient had normal brain imaging, whereas the other had loss of white matter in the temporal lobe; the latter patient also had seizures. Respiratory chain enzyme analysis showed decreased activities of complexes I, II, and IV, which was more pronounced in skeletal muscle than in fibroblasts. |
614924::combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency-12 (COXPD12) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the EARS2 gene (612799) on chromosome 16p.|COXPD12 is an autosomal recessive mitochondrial neurologic disorder characterized by onset in infancy of hypotonia and delayed psychomotor development, or early developmental regression, associated with T2-weighted hyperintensities in the deep cerebral white matter, brainstem, and cerebellar white matter. Serum lactate is increased due to a defect in mitochondrial respiration. There are 2 main phenotypic groups: those with a milder disease course and some recovery of skills after age 2 years, and those with a severe disease course resulting in marked disability (summary by Steenweg et al., 2012). For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency, see COXPD1 (609060).|Steenweg et al. (2012) reported a 6-year-old Italian boy with a leukoencephalopathy apparent since early infancy. Hypotonia was noted at 1 month of age, and he did not have head control at 3 months. The patient developed seizures at age 6 months, which later remitted. At age 6 years, he had spastic tetraparesis, dystonia, bradykinesia, ptosis, ophthalmoplegia, visual deficits, and absence of speech. He never achieved postural or head control and could not chew. Laboratory studies showed intermittent increases of serum transaminases, increased alpha-fetoprotein (AFP; 104150), and increased serum lactate. Muscle biopsy showed cytochrome c oxidase (COX)-negative fibers and reduced complex I, III, and IV, indicating a mitochondrial defect. Steenweg et al. (2012) identified 11 additional patients with a similar brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) pattern from a database of patients with leukoencephalopathies of unknown origin. Three of the patients had a more severe phenotype similar to that of the Italian boy. The severe phenotype was characterized by onset soon after birth of hypotonia and lack of psychomotor development followed by spastic tetraparesis, dystonia, visual impairment, and seizures. These patients later stabilized, but failed to improve and remained severely disabled and eventually were tube-fed. Eight of the additional patients had a milder form of the disorder. They had normal or mildly delayed early development with onset of regression later in the first year of life. Regression included spasticity, loss of milestones, and sometimes seizures and extreme irritability. However, from the second year on, these patients showed clinical and biochemical improvement. They regained milestones, including walking, and seizures and spasticity improved. Lactate levels decreased and normalized, and brain MRI abnormalities improved. Of note, there were 2 affected brothers: 1 had the milder phenotype and the other had the more severe phenotype. Steenweg et al. (2012) interpreted the data as pointing to a biphasic clinical course. The severity of an initial hit early in life predicts whether or not a patient shows neurologic recovery and progress or has severe and permanent handicap. |Talim et al. (2013) reported a male infant, born of consanguineous parents, with multiple congenital anomalies and multisystem dysfunction resulting in death at age 3 months from bronchopneumonia. Hypospadias and incomplete cleft palate were noted at birth, and he presented with hypotonia, failure to thrive, and lactic acidosis in the neonatal period. Brain MRI at age 1 month showed dysgenesis in the posterior part of corpus callosum; white matter abnormalities were not noted. He did not have seizures, but did not achieve any motor milestones. Other features included hepatomegaly, elevated liver enzymes, and mild hypertrophy of the cardiac interventricular septum. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed ragged-red and ragged-blue fibers, COX deficiency, and severe combined deficiency of respiratory chain complexes I and IV. Postmortem examination of the liver showed macrovesicular steatosis with mild fibrosis and cholestasis. |Brain MRI of the Italian boy reported by Steenweg et al. (2012) showed T2-weighted hyperintensities of the deep cerebral white matter, including the thalami and hypothalami, as well as in the brainstem and cerebellum, with sparing of the periventricular region. The posterior part of the corpus callosum was abnormally thin. Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) showed increased lactate in the cerebral white matter. Eleven additional patients with a similar brain MRI pattern were identified from a large database. They had signal abnormalities and swelling of the deep cerebral white matter with sparing of the periventricular rim. The corpus callosum, thalamus, basal ganglia, midbrain, pons, medulla, and cerebellar white matter were consistently affected. In 5 patients, the posterior part of the corpus callosum was abnormally thin. Three patients with a more severe clinical phenotype had a dysplastic corpus callosum with agenesis of the posterior part and abnormal positioning of the lateral ventricles. |
614946::combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency-14 (COXPD14) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the FARS2 gene (611592) on chromosome 6p25.Biallelic mutation in the FARS2 gene can also cause SPG77 (617046), a much less severe disorder.|COXPD14 is a severe multisystemic autosomal recessive disorder characterized by neonatal onset of global developmental delay, refractory seizures, and lactic acidosis. Biochemical studies show deficiencies of multiple mitochondrial respiratory enzymes. Neuropathologic studies in 1 patient showed laminar cortical necrosis, characteristic of Alpers syndrome (203700) (summary by Elo et al., 2012).For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of combined oxidative phosphorylation deficiency, see COXPD1 (609060).|Shamseldin et al. (2012) reported a consanguineous Saudi Arabian family in which 3 sibs had a severe mitochondrial encephalopathy. The proband was a 1.9-year-old girl with significant global developmental delay, lactic acidosis, and onset of uncontrolled seizures at age 35 days. Other features included poor feeding, poor physical growth with microcephaly (-2.4 SD), visual and hearing impairment, hypotonia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Laboratory studies showed high lactate, and muscle biopsy showed scattered fibers with intense NADH and SDH activity without ragged-red fibers or cytochrome c oxidase (COX)-negative fibers. Electron microscopy showed subtle mitochondrial abnormalities, but there was no deletion or depletion of mitochondrial DNA. Brain MRI showed diffuse cerebral atrophy, enlarged ventricles, and bilateral hyperintense T2-weighted lesions in the basal ganglia, consistent with Leigh syndrome (256000). There was no evidence of liver impairment. The overall picture suggested a defect in enzymes involved in oxidative phosphorylation. The proband had 2 affected sibs with developmental delay and seizures; both died before 3 months of age. Elo et al. (2012) provided some follow-up of the index patient reported by Shamseldin et al. (2012), who died at age 22 months. |Elo et al. (2012) reported a Finnish family in which 2 sisters had a fatal infantile mitochondrial encephalopathy. The proband developed treatment-resistant myoclonic seizures on the second day of life. Laboratory studies showed generalized aminoaciduria and increased lactate in the blood and cerebrospinal fluid. Initial brain MRI and EEG were normal, but EEG at 6 weeks showed multifocal spikes and brain MRI at 3 months showed severe central and cortical atrophy with signal increases in the putamina. Liver biopsy showed enlarged hepatocytes, increased glycogen, and iron and copper accumulation, but transaminases were normal. Muscle biopsy showed decreased COX immunostaining and subsarcolemmal glycogen, but no ragged-red fibers. Complex I activity in muscle was increased compared to control values, but succinate dehydrogenase was 50% and COX was 16% of control. She had microcephaly and slightly coarse retinal pigmentation, but normal optic nerve. She had no psychomotor development, and died at age 8 months. Gel electrophoresis showed a severe reduction of complex IV in the brain and skeletal muscle and partial complex I deficiency in the brain; complex I in skeletal muscles was slightly increased. In contrast, defects in respiratory chain complexes were not observed in patient fibroblasts. Neuropathologic examination showed generalized atrophy with striking subtotal laminar necrosis of the cortical ribbon. There was microcystic degeneration, lack of pyramidal cells, reactive gliosis, and areas of spongiosis. Degenerative changes were observed in the cortex, cerebellum, and brainstem. The neuropathologic changes, together with the liver involvement, were reminiscent of Alpers syndrome (203700). The patient had an older sister with a similar disorder who died of multiorgan failure at age 21 months. |Almalki et al. (2014) reported a 2.5-year-old boy, born of unrelated British Caucasian parents, with onset of severe seizures associated with hypsarrhythmia on EEG at age 6 months, followed by delayed psychomotor development. The seizures became refractory, and brain imaging showed subcortical white matter lesions and thinning of the corpus callosum. Other features included no visual awareness, increased limb tone, hyperreflexia, and mild dysmorphic features, including small anteriorly rotated ears and broad nasal root. Patient skeletal muscle and myoblasts showed an isolated complex IV deficiency, which was not observed in fibroblasts. Almalki et al. (2014) noted that the phenotype in their patient was slightly different from that reported by Shamseldin et al. (2012) and Elo et al. (2012). |Walker et al. (2016) reported a girl with severe juvenile-onset epileptic encephalopathy. She had mildly delayed psychomotor development with speech delay, including walking at age 17 months, running at 24 months, and first word at age 3.5 years with a plateau of language skills at age 5 to 7 years. She had a first prolonged generalized tonic-clonic seizure at age 8 years, followed by progression of the epilepsy, which became refractory and associated with spike-wave discharges on EEG that also occurred during sleep. EEG also showed background slowing. She developed epilepsia partialis continua starting at age 10 years, and status epilepticus at age 13. Her neurologic status progressively declined: she was unable to follow commands or track faces, and she had unreactive pupils, near-continuous myoclonus of the right face, arm, and leg, absence of purposeful movement, and extensor plantar responses. Brain MRI showed extensive areas of T2-weighted hyperintensities. She died at age 15 years. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed type 2 fiber atrophy and myofibrillary disarray with enlarged and swollen mitochondria containing glycogen. Activities of complexes I-IV were normal in frozen skeletal muscle samples. Postmortem examination showed laminar cortical neuronal loss, necrosis, gliosis, and diminished subcortical white matter and descending corticospinal tracts. The most severely affected regions were the frontal and visual cortices. A small region of spongiform change was noted in the right thalamus. Genetic analysis identified compound heterozygous missense variants in the FARS2 gene (P85A and H135D) that occurred in the larger catalytic domain and were shown in in vitro studies to be detrimental to enzyme function. The findings expanded the phenotype associated with mutations in the FARS2 gene. |Vantroys et al. (2017) reviewed the clinical descriptions and mutations reported in patients with COXPD14, which the authors called 'the epileptic phenotype,' and spastic paraplegia caused by mutations in the FARS2 gene. |
202110::the phenotype is caused by mutation in the gene encoding steroid 17-monooxygenase (CYP17A1; 609300). The enzyme has both 17-alpha-hydroxylase and 17,20-lyase activities.|Deficiency of adrenal 17-hydroxylation activity was first demonstrated in a single 46,XX patient by Biglieri et al. (1966), who suggested a similar defect in the gonad. Production of excessive corticosterone and deoxycorticosterone resulted in hypertension and hypokalemic alkalosis. Aldosterone synthesis was almost totally absent. The patient had normal stature and amenorrhea. Although there were no other cases in the family and parental consanguinity was not noted, recessive inheritance was possible. Biglieri (1997) reviewed the evolution of the clinical features and laboratory findings in this case over 3 years. |Goldsmith et al. (1967) reported a second case in whom the defect in 17-alpha-hydroxylation may have been less complete than in the first case. The patient was a 26-year-old 46,XX woman with hypertension, primary amenorrhea, and lack of secondary sexual characteristics. Mallin (1969) described congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 17-hydroxylase deficiency in 2 sisters. New (1970) reported the first affected male. The clinical features were pseudohermaphroditism with ambiguous external genitalia and prominent breast development at puberty. Unlike the previously reported female cases, this male patient did not demonstrate severe hypertension or hypokalemia. Testicular feminization was simulated in a patient reported by Heremans et al. (1976). |Yazaki et al. (1982) reported a Japanese phenotypic female, born of consanguineous parents, with generalized muscle weakness due to hypokalemic myopathy, primary amenorrhea, and lack of pubertal development. Laparoscopy showed intraabdominal testes and no uterus. Karyotype was 46,XY. Laboratory studies showed increased plasma progesterone, corticosterone, aldosterone, ACTH (see 176830), LH (see 152780), and FSH (see 136530). Glucocorticoid replacement normalized plasma levels of ACTH, 17-deoxysteroids, and potassium. This patient was later found to have a homozygous mutation in the CYP17A1 gene (609300.0011; Yamaguchi et al., 1997), consistent with combined complete 17-alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency. |Scaroni et al. (1991) reported a family in which 3 members, 2 adult females and 1 pubertal-aged genotypic male, had congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 17-alpha hydroxylase deficiency. All presented as phenotypic females with lack of sexual development and hypokalemic hypertension. Baseline hormonal studies showed low glucocorticoid, androgen, and estrogen levels. As a consequence, ACTH, LH, and FSH concentrations were increased. Plasma renin and aldosterone were also decreased. Short-term dexamethasone treatment normalized potassium and reduced blood pressure and the abnormal mineralocorticoid levels. |Martin et al. (2003) reported 11 patients from 6 Brazilian families with combined 17-alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency. All patients had elevated basal serum levels of progesterone and suppressed plasma renin activity. The authors concluded that basal progesterone measurement is a useful marker of P450c17 deficiency and that its use should reduce the misdiagnosis of this deficiency in patients presenting with male pseudohermaphroditism, primary or secondary amenorrhea, and mineralocorticoid excess syndrome. |Combined Partial 17-alpha-Hydroxylase/17,20-Lyase Deficiency|Oshiro et al. (1995) reported a 32-year-old Japanese woman with combined partial 17-alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency caused by mutation in the CYP17A1 gene (609300.0008). The patient was referred because of hypertension and amenorrhea. She had menarche at the age of 14 years with irregular menstruation until the age of 20, but no menstruation thereafter. Hypertension had been known since the age of 20 years. She had a flat chest, infantile genitalia, and no pubic or axillary hair. Computed tomography revealed bilateral adrenal hyperplasia without tumors, uterine hypoplasia, and atrophy of the ovaries. The patient had hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and positive Trousseau sign. |Yanase et al. (1989) reported a Japanese woman with combined partial 17-alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency caused by mutation in the CYP17A1 gene (609300.0002). Functional expression studies showed that 17-alpha-hydroxylase and 17,20-lyase activities were less than 37% and 8% of normal, respectively. On a visit to the hospital at the age of 20 because of occipital headache, the patient was found to have hypertension and hypokalemia. Menstruation was irregular. Physical examination showed hypoplastic breasts and no pubic or axillary hair. Miura et al. (1996) reported follow-up of the Japanese woman reported by Yanase et al. (1989). In 1968, she was reported as having glucocorticoid-responsive hyperaldosteronism. She was treated with dexamethasone, resulting in normal blood pressure and normokalemia for 28 years. Because of sustained vaginal bleeding, she had a total hysterectomy at age 42. No follicles or corpus luteum were detected in the ovarian specimen. At age 45 years, she had decreased levels of sex steroids and increased levels of gonadotropins. Miura et al. (1996) concluded that the disorder resulted in early reduction of gonadal function with increasing age. |Isolated 17,20-Lyase Deficiency|Geller et al. (1997) reported 2 patients with 46,XY karyotypes with isolated 17,20-lyase deficiency caused by different homozygous mutations in the CYP17A1 gene (609300.0012 and 609300.0013, respectively). The first patient showed genital ambiguity at birth, and was assigned female gender. When seen at 13 months of age, the patient showed a 2.2-cm phallus, perineal hypospadias, bilateral gonads palpable in a bifid scrotum, and a blind vaginal pouch seen on urethrocystograms. The parents were first cousins. Serum cortisol and electrolytes and blood pressure were normal. Gonadotropins were at normal prepubertal level in this patient. Testicular stimulation with human chorionic gonadotropin elicited grossly subnormal responses of testosterone, DHEA, and androstenedione. Basal and hCG-stimulated progesterone was normal. The second patient also showed genital ambiguity at birth, and was assigned male gender. Gynecomastia developed at 14 years of age, and at 16 years the breasts were Tanner stage V; pubic hair was Tanner stage IV, but there was minimal body hair. The genitalia were characterized by a 4.5-cm phallus, perineal hypospadias, bifid scrotum, small descended testis on the right and left in the inguinal canal, and a blind vaginal pouch detected by urethrocystography. The parents denied consanguinity. |Biason-Lauber et al. (1997) reported a newborn male patient from Israel with micropenis, undescended testes, and a hormonal pattern consistent with isolated 17,20-lyase deficiency. They found compound heterozygosity for mutations in the CYP17A1 gene. Gupta et al. (2001) studied one of the mutations and was unable to demonstrate activity consistent with the diagnosis. Hershkovitz et al. (2008) restudied this patient along with 3 other affected male relatives. They found deficiency of cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (POR) caused by homozygosity for a mutation in the POR gene (124015.0016) in these individuals. Sequencing of the CYP17A1 in 2 different laboratories failed to find the mutations reported by Biason-Lauber et al. (1997). Hershkovitz et al. (2008) concluded that POR deficiency (201750) can masquerade clinically as isolated 17,20-lyase deficiency. |Auchus (2017) reviewed the genetic and pharmacologic features of steroid 17-hydroxylase and 17,20-lyase deficiencies. |
614482::congenital cataracts, hearing loss, and neurodegeneration (CCHLND) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SLC33A1 gene (603690) on chromosome 3q25.|Congenital cataracts, hearing loss, and neurodegeneration (CCHLND) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by congenital cataracts, severe psychomotor retardation, and hearing loss associated with decreased serum ceruloplasmin and copper. Brain MRI shows cerebral and cerebellar atrophy and hypomyelination (summary by Huppke et al., 2012). |Horvath et al. (2005) reported a boy, born of consanguineous Arab parents, who presented in the first weeks of life with severe hypotonia, weakness of the neck muscles, and bilateral congenital cataracts. Examination at age 4 months showed delayed psychomotor development, severe hypotonia, inability to fix gaze, and rotary nystagmus. Laboratory studies showed low serum copper and ceruloplasmin, and neutropenia. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed some enlarged and abnormal mitochondria and decreased cytochrome c oxidase activity. Brain MRI at age 5 months revealed Dandy-Walker malformation, hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis, and hypoplasia of the temporal lobes. Treatment with copper histidinate supplementation resulted in marked clinical improvement by ages 8 and 13 months: hypotonia was less severe, and there was complete restoration of cytochrome c oxidase activity in skeletal muscle, although serum copper levels did not increase significantly. At age 13 months, he was noted to have bilateral hearing impairment. Patient fibroblasts showed an increased copper uptake with normal retention. Immunoblot analysis excluded deficiencies of ATP7A (300011), which causes Menkes disease (309400), and ATP7B (606882), which causes Wilson disease (277900), 2 disorders of copper metabolism. Huppke et al. (2012) provided follow-up of the patient reported by Horvath et al. (2005), who died at age 4 years. |Huppke et al. (2012) reported 4 patients from 3 families with a phenotype similar to that reported in the patient by Horvath et al. (2005). All had severe psychomotor retardation, with inability to sit or walk independently and lack of speech, as well as congenital cataracts and hearing loss. Additional, more variable neurologic features included nystagmus (3) and seizures (2). Brain MRI showed cerebral and cerebellar atrophy, wide subarachnoid spaces, and hypomyelination. Serum copper was low (10 to 20% of normal), and ceruloplasmin was very low. All patients died between ages 22 months and 6 years, from various causes. Two patients treated with copper supplementation showed no clinical improvement. The patients did not show evidence of total body copper deficiency or copper toxicity. |
214700::congenital secretory chloride diarrhea, referred to here as DIAR1, is caused by homozygous mutation in the SLC26A3 gene (126650) on chromosome 7q31.|Congenital secretory chloride diarrhea is an autosomal recessive form of severe chronic diarrhea characterized by excretion of large amounts of watery stool containing high levels of chloride, resulting in dehydration, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis. The electrolyte disorder resembles the renal disorder Bartter syndrome (see 607364), except that chloride diarrhea is not associated with calcium level abnormalities (summary by Choi et al., 2009). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Diarrhea|Other forms of diarrhea include DIAR2 (251850), caused by mutation in the MYO5B gene (606540) on 18q21; DIAR3 (270420), caused by mutation in the SPINT2 gene (605124) on 19q13; DIAR4 (610370), caused by mutation in the NEUROG3 gene (604882) on 10q21; DIAR5 (613217), caused by mutation in the EPCAM gene (185535) on 2p21; DIAR6 (614616), caused by mutation in the GUCY2C gene (601330) on 12p12; DIAR7 (615863) caused by mutation in the DGAT1 gene (604900) on 8q24; DIAR8 (616868), caused by mutation in the SLC9A3 gene (182307) on 5p15; DIAR9 (618168), caused by mutation in the WNT2B gene (601968) on 1p13; and DIAR10 (618183), caused by mutation in the PLVAP gene (607647) on 19p13.|This disorder was first described by Gamble et al. (1945) and Darrow (1945). Voluminous watery stools containing an excess of chloride are present from a few weeks of age. The children are often premature. Hydramnios, presumably due to intrauterine diarrhea (Holmberg et al., 1975), may complicate pregnancy. Indeed, polyhydramnios is probably an invariant feature. |Pasternack and Perheentupa (1966) described vascular changes resembling those of hypertensive angiopathy in 7 children, aged 1 to 42 months at the time of biopsy. All were normotensive. Kidney and muscle were biopsied. |Lubani et al. (1989) identified 16 affected Kuwaiti children over a 7-year period. All children had a shortened gestational period, abdominal distention, and chronic diarrhea. The serum electrolytes in all patients before treatment showed hyponatremia, hypokalemia, hypochloremia, and metabolic alkalosis. Diagnosis was confirmed by a stool chloride content that exceeded the sum of fecal sodium and potassium. In chloride diarrhea, juxtaglomerular hyperplasia, hyperreninemia and hyperaldosteronism, leading to hyperkaluria and hypokalemia, simulate the Bartter syndrome (see 241200). As in the latter disorder, inhibitors of prostaglandin synthetase have beneficial effects (Minford and Barr, 1980). In the intestinal brush border there is both an Na+/H+ and a chloride/bicarbonate exchange mechanism. A defect in either can impede NaCl absorption and lead to secretory diarrhea. The latter exchange mechanism is defective in chloride diarrhea; the former is deranged in sodium diarrhea (270420). |
212065::congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ia (CDG Ia, CDG1A) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding phosphomannomutase-2 (PMM2; 601785) on chromosome 16p13.|Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDGs) are a genetically heterogeneous group of autosomal recessive disorders caused by enzymatic defects in the synthesis and processing of asparagine (N)-linked glycans or oligosaccharides on glycoproteins. These glycoconjugates play critical roles in metabolism, cell recognition and adhesion, cell migration, protease resistance, host defense, and antigenicity, among others. CDGs are divided into 2 main groups: type I CDGs comprise defects in the assembly of the dolichol lipid-linked oligosaccharide (LLO) chain and its transfer to the nascent protein, whereas type II CDGs (see, e.g., CDG2A, 212066) refer to defects in the trimming and processing of the protein-bound glycans either late in the endoplasmic reticulum or the Golgi compartments. CDG1A is the most common form of CDG and was the first to be characterized at the molecular level (reviews by Marquardt and Denecke, 2003; Grunewald et al., 2002). |Matthijs et al. (1997) noted that Jaeken syndrome (CDG1A) is a genetic multisystem disorder characterized by defective glycosylation of glycoconjugates. It usually presents as a severe disorder in the neonatal period. There is a severe encephalopathy with axial hypotonia, abnormal eye movement, and pronounced psychomotor retardation, as well as peripheral neuropathy, cerebellar hypoplasia, and retinitis pigmentosa. Patients show a peculiar distribution of subcutaneous fat, nipple retraction, and hypogonadism. There is a 20% lethality in the first year of life due to severe infections, liver insufficiency, or cardiomyopathy. |Marques-da-Silva et al. (2017) noted that CDG1A is the most prevalent form of CDG, with more than 700 patients reported worldwide. |Genetic Heterogeneity of Congenital Disorder of Glycosylation Type I|Multiple forms of CDG type I have been identified; see CDG1B (602579) through CDG1Y (300934), CDG1AA (617082) and CDG1BB (see 613861).|A congenital disorder of deglycosylation (CDDG; 615273), formerly designated CDG1V, is caused by mutation in the NGLY1 gene (610661).|A disorder formerly designated CDG1Z was classified as a form of early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (EIEE50; 616457).|CDG type Ia was first described in an abstract by Jaeken et al. (1980). In a complete report, Jaeken et al. (1984) described Belgian identical twin sisters with a disorder characterized by psychomotor retardation suggestive of a demyelinating disease and multiple serum glycoprotein abnormalities. Serum and CSF transferrin (TF; 190000) were found to be deficient in sialic acid. |Jaeken et al. (1987) described 4 girls, including the monozygotic twins described earlier, from 3 unrelated families who had a neurologic syndrome characterized by severe psychomotor retardation with generalized hypotonia, hyporeflexia, and trunk ataxia. Growth was retarded, but 2 were moderately obese. All 4 had almond-shaped eyes and alternating internal strabismus. Two had fusiform phalanges of the fingers, prominent labia majora, and symmetric fat accumulations as well as lipodystrophy of the buttocks, which seemed to disappear with age. Biochemical analysis and isoelectric focusing showed a decrease of several serum glycoproteins, and total serum glycoproteins were deficient in sialic acid, galactose, and N-acetylglucosamine. Serum activity of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase was reduced to 37% of normal, but Jaeken et al. (1987) suggested that since a mixture of isoenzymes from various sources was being measured, the 37% reduction might represent a more profound deficiency of 1 isoenzyme. Among the parents, only the fathers showed some biochemical abnormalities: partial thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG; 314200) deficiency, hypocholesterolemia, and a 10% deficiency of sialic acid, galactose, and N-acetylglucosamine in total serum glycoproteins. Jaeken et al. (1987) thus initially considered that the affected girls might be homozygous for a mutant gene coding for an N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase, possibly on the X chromosome. |Jaeken and Stibler (1989) described the disorder as a neurologic syndrome with cerebellar hypoplasia and peripheral demyelination associated with abnormalities of multiple secretory glycoproteins. All serum glycoproteins were reported as partially deficient in sialic acid, galactose, and N-acetylglucosamine, suggesting a deficiency of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase.|Kristiansson et al. (1989) reported 7 Swedish children with what the authors termed 'disialotransferrin developmental deficiency syndrome.' There were 3 pairs of sibs and 1 sporadic case. All 7 patients had mental retardation, were prone to acute cerebral dysfunction during catabolic states, and developed abnormal lower neuron, cerebellar, and retinal functions in later childhood. They had a characteristic external appearance with decreased subcutaneous tissue. Biochemical studies showed abnormal sialic acid transferrin patterns in serum and CSF. |Buist and Powell (1991) reported 2 sisters, aged 14 and 16 years, whom they had followed for 13 years. Both presented in infancy with developmental delay, hypotonia, wandering eye movements, strabismus, and failure to thrive. One child had pseudolipomas over each gluteus medius and the other had similar fatty tissue causing enlarged labia majora. The characteristic fat pads disappeared in childhood. Isoelectric focusing of transferrin showed marked decrease of the tetrasialo fraction and increase in the di- and asialo fractions. The findings suggested a generalized defect in sialylation of serum glycoproteins.|Eeg-Olofsson and Wahlstrom (1991) reported that 20 Swedish patients with the carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome came from 13 families, all from the southern part of the country. The oldest patient with CDG was a woman born in 1942, and the youngest, a girl born in 1988. Eight Swedish families had 2 sibs with CDG. Two concordantly affected monozygotic twin-pairs were known. In 20 CDG families, if correction was made for the ascertainment bias by exclusion of the index patient in each family, the number of affected sibs and healthy sibs agreed satisfactorily with the recessive hypothesis.|Harrison et al. (1992) studied a 24-month-old girl whose clinical findings of hypotonia, delayed development, cerebellar hypoplasia, and metabolic crises were consistent with the clinical diagnosis of CDG. They also studied a brother and sister, aged 21 and 19 years, respectively, with this disorder. High-resolution 2-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (2DE) and silver staining yielded a potentially pathognomonic profile of multiple serum protein anomalies in CDG. Both parents had normal serum protein 2DE patterns. |Petersen et al. (1993) reported on the first 5 of 8 patients with CDG diagnosed in Denmark from 1989 until the end of 1991. Three were male and 2 were a pair of male-female twins. All 5 children were seen during their first year of life with failure to thrive, feeding difficulties, psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, esotropia, inverted nipples, lipodystrophy, pericardial effusion, and hepatic dysfunction. Steatosis was observed in liver biopsy specimens, and cerebellar hypoplasia was present on computed tomography. |Ohno et al. (1992) described 3 affected Japanese children from 2 families. The clinical picture was that of a multisystem disorder characterized by mental retardation, nonprogressive ataxia, polyneuropathy, hepatopathy during infancy, and growth retardation. Studies of serum transferrin by isoelectric focusing demonstrated increases in disialotransferrin and asialotransferrin. Removal of sialic acid with neuraminidase demonstrated the same transferrin phenotypes as in the parents. Similarly, carbohydrate-deficient fractions of serum alpha-1-antitrypsin (PI; 107400) were detected.|Harrison (1993) identified 9 patients with CDG, including 1 from a nonconsanguineous Puerto Rican family and another from a nonconsanguineous Chinese family.|In a review, Hagberg et al. (1993) stated that CDG I had been diagnosed in 45 Scandinavian patients and presented different clinical phenotypic features of the syndrome according to period of life. During infancy, internal organ symptoms predominate and some may be life-threatening. In later childhood and adolescence, static mental deficiency, cerebellar ataxia, slowly progressive lower limb neuropathy, pigmentary retinal degeneration, and secondary skeletal deformities are the most prominent findings. Hagberg et al. (1993) summarized the features of CDG IIa and compared them with those of CDG I. |Drouin-Garraud et al. (2001) also noted that clinical findings of CDG Ia tend to change with age. During infancy, patients present with severe neurologic involvement with hypotonia, failure to thrive, roving eye movements, and developmental delay. There is often cerebellar and brainstem atrophy as well as hepatic and cardiac manifestations. Children with CDG Ia have a relatively static clinical course, with ataxia as the predominant sign. Musculoskeletal complications, such as kyphoscoliosis and muscular atrophy, appear in late childhood. Adults commonly manifest endocrine dysfunctions, such as hypogonadism and insulin resistance. |De Lonlay et al. (2001) reported the clinical, biologic, and molecular analysis of 26 patients with CDG I including 20 CDG Ia, 2 CDG Ib, 1 CDG Ic, and 3 CDG Ix patients detected by Western blotting and isoelectric focusing of serum transferrin. Based on clinical features, de Lonlay et al. (2001) concluded that CDG Ia could be split into 2 subtypes: a neurologic form with psychomotor retardation, strabismus, cerebellar hypoplasia, and retinitis pigmentosa, and a multivisceral form with neurologic and extraneurologic manifestations including liver, cardiac, renal, or gastrointestinal involvement. Inverted nipples, cerebellar hypoplasia, and abnormal subcutaneous fat distribution were not present in all cases. |Drouin-Garraud et al. (2001) identified a French family in which 3 sibs with CDG Ia displayed an unusual presentation remarkable for both the neurologic presentation and the dissociation between intermediate PMM2 activity in fibroblasts and a decreased PMM2 activity in leukocytes. Their report showed that the diagnosis of CDG Ia must be considered in patients with nonregressive early-onset encephalopathy with cerebellar atrophy, and that intermediate values of PMM2 activity in fibroblasts do not exclude the diagnosis. |Coman et al. (2008) reviewed the skeletal manifestations of congenital disorders of glycosylation, which they suggested may be underrecognized. |The most severe form of CDG Ia has a neonatal onset. Agamanolis et al. (1986) reported 2 sibs with olivopontocerebellar degeneration, failure to thrive, hepatic fatty change and cirrhosis, and a dyslipoproteinemia characterized by low cholesterol and elevated triglycerides. Cerebellar degeneration progressed rapidly during the first year of life and both children died from intercurrent infections and surgical complications. The authors suggested a metabolic defect. Harding et al. (1988) reported a similar case of neonatal onset with biochemical abnormalities and other systemic involvement. Horslen et al. (1991) reported 2 brothers with neonatal onset of olivopontocerebellare degeneration, failure to thrive, hypotonia, liver disease, and visual inattention. Microcystic renal changes were observed at autopsy. The patients also had abnormalities in serum transferrin, and Horslen et al. (1991) concluded that the disorder was a severe manifestation of CDG. |Clayton et al. (1992) described their seventh patient with neonatal-onset CDG in whom the disorder was established by electrophoresis with immunofixation of serum transferrin, which showed a reduced amount of tetrasialotransferrin, an increased amount of disialotransferrin, and the presence of asialotransferrin. A new feature was severe hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Respiratory distress and a murmur with episodes of arterial oxygen desaturation had brought the neonate to cardiologic assessment. After initial spontaneous improvement he presented at 9 weeks with severe manifestations of the cardiomyopathy. Chang et al. (1993) reported the case of an 8-month-old male infant who presented in the neonatal period with failure to thrive, bilateral pleural and pericardial effusions, and hepatic insufficiency and showed at autopsy olivopontocerebellar atrophy, micronodular cirrhosis, and renal tubular microcysts. |In a neonate with neurologic abnormalities and congenital nephrotic syndrome of diffuse mesangial sclerosis type, van der Knapp et al. (1996) found diagnostic evidence of CDG I. However, there was no evidence of pontocerebellar atrophy by imaging or at autopsy. They concluded that CDG I should be considered in patients with congenital nephrotic syndrome and that absence of pontocerebellar atrophy did not exclude the diagnosis.|
270420::congenital secretory sodium diarrhea with or without other congenital anomalies (DIAR3) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SPINT2 gene (605124) on chromosome 19q13.For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of diarrhea, see DIAR1 (214700).|Booth et al. (1985) described a form of congenital secretory diarrhea due to defective sodium/hydrogen exchange. The clinical presentation and course closely resembled that of congenital chloride diarrhea (214700) but stool electrolyte and other studies excluded this possibility. Jejunal perfusion studies showed the jejunum to be in a net secretory state with intact hexose transport, but with an anomalous relation between jejunal sodium and hydrogen transport. The stool showed a high bicarbonate content, as did the duodenal juice during fasting. The case of Booth et al. (1985) was born of a pregnancy complicated by hydramnios. Maternal abdominal ultrasound showed the fetal abdomen to be distended by fluid-filled loops of intestine. Abdominal distention was present at birth and profuse watery diarrhea began immediately. |Keller et al. (1990) reported a boy, born of nonconsanguineous parents, who had protracted and ultimately lethal diarrhea from the third day of life. Radiologic findings in the gastrointestinal tract were unremarkable, and jejunal and ileal biopsy specimens showed mild partial villous atrophy but looked normal on electron microscopy. Analysis of jejunal brush border membrane vesicles revealed a gross defect in sodium/proton exchange (6% of mean control value) but normal sodium-stimulated glucose uptake. He was maintained on parenteral nutrition and died of severe intercurrent infection at 18 months of age. Two previous sibs, both girls, had died of severe protracted diarrhea at 2 and 11 months of age; both had very high stool sodium concentrations. The authors noted that in contrast to the patient reported by Booth et al. (1985), who grew and developed normally on appropriate electrolyte supplements, this patient required prolonged parenteral nutrition and had no history of hydramnios; citing the fatal outcome and strong family history, Keller et al. (1990) suggested that this represented a different disease. |Fell et al. (1992) reported a boy, the first child of nonconsanguineous parents, who was born of a pregnancy complicated by polyhydramnios and had a grossly distended abdomen at birth with immediate onset of profuse secretory diarrhea. He subsequently thrived on breast milk and electrolyte supplements. Studies of jejunal brush border membrane vesicles showed evidence of a partial defect in sodium/proton exchange (45% of mean control value); nonequilibrium rectal dialysis showed rectal sodium and potassium transport to be intact. His diarrhea resolved after 9 months and he subsequently required occasional laxatives. The authors suggested that there is a broad spectrum of clinical severity within congenital sodium-losing diarrhea. |Congenital Secretory Sodium Diarrhea with Associated Features|Muller et al. (2000) stated that only 6 cases of congenital sodium diarrhea had been reported. They studied 5 infants with secretory diarrhea from 2 affected CSD families identified in a circumscribed rural area in Austria, making the diagnosis on daily fecal sodium excretion between 98 and 190 mM/L, hyponatremia, metabolic acidosis, and low to normal urinary sodium concentration. Two of the 5 patients were born with choanal atresia. Muller et al. (2000) cited cases of congenital secretory diarrhea combined with choanal atresia observed in Sweden, Germany, and the Netherlands. |Heinz-Erian et al. (2009) reviewed data from 24 patients with congenital sodium diarrhea from 17 families, including the families previously described by Holmberg and Perheentupa (1985) (see 616868), Booth et al. (1985), and Muller et al. (2000), and found that affected individuals from 10 of the families had a syndromic form of CSD, associated with choanal or anal atresia, hypertelorism, and corneal erosions, whereas patients from the remaining 7 families had isolated CSD. Additional features in the syndromic patients included double kidney, cleft palate, and digital anomalies; 2 patients also had anal atresia. |Bird et al. (2007) reported 3 sibs with intractable diarrhea of infancy who also had choanal atresia/stenosis, mild short stature, prominent and broad nasal bridge, micrognathia, single palmar creases, chronic corneal inflammation, recurrent fevers of unknown origin associated with cytopenia, and abnormal hair texture. Additional features in this family included bifid uvula and bilateral preauricular pits, seen in the proband, as well as 2/3 toe syndactyly, reported in an older sister who had died of congenital diarrhea. Multiple enteric and colonic biopsies over the course of the 8-year-old proband's disease showed chronic active inflammation and moderate to severe villus atrophy; a duodenal biopsy at 6 years of age during an episode of vomiting and gastrointestinal bleeding also showed focal disorganization and crowding of surface enterocytes, and a diagnosis of tufting enteropathy was made. An affected younger sister died at age 4 years with end-stage liver disease that was presumed to be a consequence of chronic parenteral alimentation; necropsy revealed severe small intestinal villus blunting with gland dropout and epithelial tufts consistent with tufting enteropathy. |
203400::corticosterone methyloxidase type I deficiency (CMO I deficiency) is caused by mutation in the CYP11B2 gene (124080).|CMO type I deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a defect in the penultimate biochemical step of aldosterone biosynthesis, the 18-hydroxylation of corticosterone (B) to 18-hydroxycorticosterone (18-OHB). This enzymatic defect results in decreased aldosterone and salt-wasting. In CMO I deficiency, aldosterone is undetectable, whereas its immediate precursor, 18-OHB, is low or normal. These patients have an increased ratio of corticosterone to 18-OHB (Portrat-Doyen et al., 1998). |The CYP11B2 gene product also catalyzes the final step in aldosterone biosynthesis: the 18-oxidation of 18-OHB to aldosterone. A defect in that enzymatic step results in CMO type II deficiency (610600), an allelic disorder with an overlapping phenotype but distinct biochemical features. In CMO II deficiency, aldosterone can be low or normal, but at the expense of increased secretion of 18-OHB. These patients have a low ratio of corticosterone to 18-OHB (Portrat-Doyen et al., 1998). |Visser and Cost (1964) and Degenhart et al. (1966) reported 3 Dutch infants, from a large consanguineous family, who presented in early infancy with dehydration, failure to thrive, poor feeding, vomiting, and intermittent fever. Laboratory studies showed hyponatremia and hyperkalemia, consistent with salt-wasting. Urinary aldosterone was undetectable and corticosterone and 11-deoxycorticosterone were increased. Total urinary excretion of 17-ketosteroids, 17-ketogenic steroids, and 17-hydroxycorticosteroids was normal. Mineralocorticoid (deoxycorticosterone acetate) supplementation was successful. Postmortem examination of 1 affected infant who died of infection showed grossly normal adrenals, but microscopic examination showed poor development of the zona glomerulosa and hyperplasia of the juxtaglomerular apparatus. The findings suggested a metabolic defect affecting biosynthesis of aldosterone at the step between corticosterone and aldosterone. All 6 parents of the 3 patients shared a great-grandparental ancestral couple in common. |In a follow-up of the family reported by Visser and Cost (1964), Peter et al. (1997) found decreased plasma levels of aldosterone and 18-OH-corticosterone and increased plasma corticosterone and 11-deoxycorticosterone. Cortisol and its precursors were in the normal range. The findings were consistent with a defect in 18-hydroxylation of corticosterone, thus confirming the diagnosis of CMO type I deficiency. |Drop et al. (1982) knew of 6 reported cases. |Kayes-Wandover et al. (2001) reported a 47-year-old man who first presented with CMO type I deficiency after developing hyperkalemia in preparation for a barium enema. Past medical history was notable for failure to thrive in infancy. Laboratory analysis showed increased serum renin with low serum and urinary levels of aldosterone, increased urinary corticosterone, and decreased urinary 18-hydroxycorticosterone. |
123400::familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease can be caused by mutation in the prion protein gene (PRNP; 176640).|Gerstmann-Straussler disease (GSD; 137440) and familial fatal insomnia (FFI; 600072) are 2 other allelic inherited prion diseases caused by mutation in the PRNP gene.|The human prion diseases occur in inherited, acquired, and sporadic forms. Approximately 15% are inherited and associated with coding mutations in the PRNP gene. Acquired prion diseases include iatrogenic CJD, kuru (245300), variant CJD (vCJD) in humans, scrapie in sheep, and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in cattle. Variant CJD is believed to be acquired from cattle infected with BSE. However, the majority of human cases of prion disease occur as sporadic CJD (sCJD) (Collinge et al., 1996; Parchi et al., 2000; Hill et al., 2003). |Johnson and Gibbs (1998) provided a comprehensive review of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and related transmissible spongiform encephalopathies. |Tyler (2003) described the characteristics of sporadic CJD as encapsulated by C. Miller Fisher in 1960.|Jakob et al. (1950) gave a follow-up on the first reported family, in which members of 3 generations may have been affected. Male-to-male transmission was documented. Davidson and Rabiner (1940) described 3 affected sibs. Friede and Dejong (1964) and later May et al. (1968) described an affected father and 3 daughters. Onset was between 38 and 45 years with a short duration of 10 months to 2 years. The disorder began with forgetfulness and nervousness, and progressed to jerky, trembling movements of the hands, loss of facial expression, and unsteady gait. Pathologic findings included severe status spongiosus, diffuse nerve cell degeneration, and some glial proliferation. |Rosenthal et al. (1976) reported a family in which 16 members had a neurologic disease ranging from subacute and chronic dementia to various motor system abnormalities without dementia. Inheritance was autosomal dominant. Although the proband had typical CJD with neuropathologic demonstration of spongiform encephalopathy, a first cousin had chronic dementia without spongiform changes. Both patients had PAS-positive, eosinophilic plaques throughout the brain. The authors suggested that susceptibility for neurologic disease in this family was inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. |Buge et al. (1978) reported a family in which 8 members spanning 3 generations had CJD. The family originated from southeast England and settled in France in 1870. Cathala et al. (1980) identified a second affected branch of the family reported by Buge et al. (1978), bringing the total number of people affected to 14. The pattern of inheritance was clearly autosomal dominant. |Bertoni et al. (1983) reported 7 individuals with CJD in 3 generations of a large kindred. They pointed out that 3 of 4 patients studied in detail were first observed with supranuclear gaze paralysis, gait ataxia, and rapidly progressive dementia. Most of the affected persons were farmers. In a Chilean family, Cartier et al. (1985) described a brother and sister and possibly a third sib who had an unusual form of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease with prominent ataxia. |Brown et al. (1984) found that 5 to 10% of CJD patients had a relatively long course lasting more than 2 years. Of this group, approximately 30% had familial disease. In addition, they had a younger age at onset (average, 48 years), and lower frequency of myoclonus (79%) and periodic EEG activity (45%) than unselected cases. The longest course was 13 years in a case proved by transmissibility. Of 225 transmitted cases, 15 (7%) had a prolonged course. The incubation period and duration of illness after injection into primates bore no relation to the duration of illness in patients. |In a consecutive series of 230 patients with neuropathologically verified CJD, Brown et al. (1986) found that men and women were affected about equally with a mean age of onset of 61.5 years. Familial cases accounted for 4 to 8% of the series. Most of the early neurologic symptoms were cerebellar or visual. Extrapyramidal muscular rigidity, myoclonus, and characteristic periodic EEG complexes were observed comparatively late. The median duration of illness was 4 months and the mean was 7.6 months; 90% of patients died within a year of onset. |Variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (vCJD)|Will et al. (1996) reported a 'new variant' of CJD in the UK. Ten of 270 cases of CJD ascertained in the UK since 1990 had clinical and neuropathologic findings that distinguished them from the other cases. Disease onset in these cases occurred between 1994 and 1995. Age at onset ranged from 16 to 39 years, with a mean of 29 years, and duration ranged from 7.5 to 22.5 months. Nine of the patients had behavioral changes as an early feature and were referred to a psychiatrist. Three patients had dysesthesias as the presenting symptom, 9 developed ataxia early in the disease, 7 developed myoclonus late in the disease course, and 3 had choreoathetosis. All patients eventually developed dementia. None of the cases had EEG features usually associated with CJD. Neuropathologic examination showed spongiform changes, neuronal loss, and gliosis most notably in the basal ganglia and thalamus, although all areas of the cerebral cortex were also affected. All cases had diffuse localization of PrP-positive plaques resembling those seen in kuru. Will et al. (1996) suggested a link between the new variant CJD and bovine spongiform encephalopathy. All 8 cases genotyped were homozygous for the met129 polymorphism in the PRNP gene (176640.0005) and had no other PRNP mutations. |Deslys et al. (1997) found that a French patient with new variant CJD first reported by Chazot et al. (1996) had PrP immunostaining and electrophoretic patterns similar to those seen in vCJD patients from the UK, suggesting that vCJD is a unique, and homogeneous, disease variant. |In a review of clinical, genetic, neuropathologic, and biochemical data of 23 French patients and 162 British patients with vCJD, Brandel et al. (2009) concluded that almost all data were similar, indicating a common infectious strain. The only difference was age at onset, which was delayed by about 8 years in French patients; disease duration was the same between the 2 populations. All of the 23 French patients and all tested British patients were homozygous for met129. Western blot analysis in the 2 groups of patients showed a type 2B PRNP isoform. The findings suggested that the French vCJD was related to imported contaminated beef products from the UK. Brandel et al. (2009) postulated that the later age of onset and death among French patients resulted from a difference in exposure or dietary habits. |Heidenhain Variant|Heidenhain (1928) reported a variant of sporadic CJD in which patients had prominent early visual symptoms. The term 'Heidenhain variant' has since been used to refer to cases in which visual symptoms occur along with otherwise characteristic features of CJD (Cooper et al., 2005). In a retrospective review of 594 pathologically proven cases of sCJD, Cooper et al. (2005) identified 22 cases with isolated visual symptoms at onset. The mean age at disease onset was 67 years, and the mean illness duration was 4 months. Seventeen (77%) were first referred to an ophthalmologist for symptoms including decreased visual acuity, blurred vision, peripheral visual field defect, visual distortions, and impaired color vision. Two had cataract surgery. Most patients showed myoclonus, pyramidal signs, and a delay in onset of dementia for several weeks. All 16 tested cases were homozygous for met129. Cooper et al. (2005) noted the diagnostic difficulties associated with this group of patients and emphasized the risk of transmission due to ocular intervention before correct diagnosis. |Keyrouz et al. (2006) reported a 51-year-old woman who presented with rapidly progressive memory loss, language impairment, and difficulty performing routine activities. She had previously been in a psychiatric ward for visual hallucinations and abnormal behavior. Other features included cortical blindness, spasticity with hyperreflexia, and myoclonic jerks. CSF 14-3-3 protein was increased. She died 4 months later. Keyrouz et al. (2006) concluded that she had the Heidenhain variant of CJD, which was characterized by pronounced hyperintensities in the occipital lobes on diffusion-weighted brain MRI. |
218800::Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the UDP-glycuronosyltransferase gene (UGT1A1; 191740) on chromosome 2q37.|Mutations in the same gene cause Gilbert syndrome (143500) and Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II (606785).|Crigler-Najjar syndrome was first described under the title 'congenital familial nonhemolytic jaundice with kernicterus' (Crigler and Najjar, 1952). The first patients originated from an inbred Old American kindred living in southern Maryland since the 1600s. Other rare recessives found in the same group included Morquio syndrome (253000), homocystinuria (236200), and metachromatic leukodystrophy (250100). In Crigler-Najjar syndrome, intense jaundice appears in the first days of life and persists thereafter. Some affected infants die in the first weeks or months of life with kernicterus. Others survive with little or no neurologic defect. The level of total serum bilirubin, predominantly indirect-reacting, ranges from 20 to 45 mg/dL. In Crigler-Najjar syndrome type II, total serum bilirubin ranges from 6 to 20 mg/dL, and in Gilbert syndrome, total serum bilirubin ranges from 1 to 6 mg/dL. Type I patients, as illustrated by those originally reported by Crigler and Najjar (1952), have complete absence of bilirubin UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UDPGT). Type II patients have a partial deficiency of this enzyme, are less severely jaundiced, have pigmented bile that contains bilirubin glucuronide, and generally survive into adulthood without neurologic or intellectual impairment, although bilirubin encephalopathy may develop in later life. Response to phenobarbital only in type II is the most useful differential point. Further insight into the natural history of this disease was afforded by the observations of Blumenschein et al. (1968). A male member of the kindred originally studied by Crigler and Najjar was normal, apart from his jaundice, until age 16 when he developed neurologic disability progressing to death after 6 months. Gardner and Konigsmark (1969) described the histopathologic findings in that patient. |Rubboli et al. (1997) studied the neurophysiologic features of 5 patients, aged 4 to 20 years, suffering from Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I, with a follow-up ranging from 3 months to 4.5 years. Two patients presented with neurologic disturbances consisting mainly of mental slowing, motor impairment, and seizures. Both presented an abnormal EEG, characterized by slowing of background activity associated with paroxysmal discharges. Liver transplantation performed in 1 of these 2 patients was followed by improvement of both the neurologic picture and the EEG. In a third patient, who was clinically normal, after 2 years of follow-up, the EEG started to show paroxysmal activity during sleep or when evoked by intermittent photic stimulation. In these 3 patients, multimodal-evoked potentials were unremarkable. The remaining 2 younger subjects did not show any clinical or EEG abnormalities. The findings suggested that whereas evoked potentials are reliable techniques to monitor bilirubin neurotoxicity in newborns and infants, EEG is more sensitive in evaluating children and adolescents for neurologic damage and effectiveness of therapeutic strategies. |Review of the literature by Shevell et al. (1998) revealed distinct, often age-related, patterns of neurologic sequelae reflecting injury to basal ganglia, cerebellar, and likely hippocampal structures. The authors stated that definitive prevention of the neurologic sequelae requires that curative treatment (hepatic transplantation and in the future gene therapy) be applied before the onset of neurologic symptoms in adolescence. |
266600::mutations in the NOD2/CARD15 gene (605956) are associated with susceptibility to Crohn disease in families linked to chromosome 16. A promoter polymorphism in the IL6 gene (147620) is associated with susceptibility to Crohn disease-associated growth failure.|For information on genetic heterogeneity of IBD, see MAPPING and MOLECULAR GENETICS sections.|Inflammatory bowel disease is characterized by a chronic relapsing intestinal inflammation. IBD is subdivided into Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis phenotypes. Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis have a combined prevalence of 200 to 300 per 100,000 in the United States. Crohn disease may involve any part of the gastrointestinal tract, but most frequently the terminal ileum and colon. Bowel inflammation is transmural and discontinuous; it may contain granulomas or be associated with intestinal or perianal fistulas. In contrast, in ulcerative colitis, the inflammation is continuous and limited to rectal and colonic mucosal layers; fistulas and granulomas are not observed. In approximately 10% of cases confined to the rectum and colon, definitive classification of Crohn disease or ulcerative colitis cannot be made and are designated 'indeterminate colitis.' Both diseases include extraintestinal inflammation of the skin, eyes, or joints.|Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis are commonly classified as autoimmune diseases. The prevalence of inflammatory bowel disease is increased in individuals with other autoimmune diseases, particularly ankylosing spondylitis, psoriasis, sclerosing cholangitis, and multiple sclerosis. There is strong evidence from twin studies, familial risk data, and segregation analysis that inflammatory bowel disease, especially Crohn disease, is genetic (Yang and Rotter, 1994; Duerr, 1996). Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis are considered complex genetic traits as inheritance does not follow any simple mendelian models. Both genetic and environmental factors seem to be important in its etiology. |Monsen et al. (1989) performed segregation analysis in 124 families with ulcerative colitis in 2 or more members. They concluded that a rare additive major gene causes the disease, with about 20% affected among those heterozygous for the gene. They found no evidence for multifactorial inheritance. They raised the possibility that the major gene may be associated with a separate type of ulcerative colitis with more extensive involvement, younger age of onset, and more immunologic side effects such as extraintestinal manifestation. |Prevalence in first-degree relatives has been estimated to be between 4 and 16% (Lewkonia and McConnell, 1976; Farmer et al., 1980). Orholm et al. (1991) found that first-degree relatives of patients with either ulcerative colitis or Crohn disease had a 10-fold increase in the risk of having the same disease as the patients. The risk of having the other of the 2 diseases was also increased, but less so, and the increase in the risk of having Crohn disease was not significant in the relatives of patients with ulcerative colitis. Yang et al. (1993) found evidence of higher frequency of inflammatory bowel disease among first-degree relatives of Jewish patients than among the relatives of non-Jewish patients. The first-degree relatives of Jewish patients had a lifetime risk for inflammatory bowel disease of 7.8% and 4.5% when probands had Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis, respectively. The values for first-degree relatives of non-Jewish probands were 5.2% and 1.6%. |Satsangi et al. (1996) studied the clinical characteristics (disease type, extent, age of onset, need for surgery, and presence of extraintestinal manifestations) in affected subjects in multiply-affected families with inflammatory bowel disease. They identified 54 families in which 1 parent and at least 1 child were affected (a total of 77 parent-child pairs) and 155 families in which 2 sibs were affected (a total of 190 affected sib pairs). In affected parent-child pairs, parent and child were concordant for 'disease type' (Crohn disease or ulcerative colitis) in 58 of 77 pairs (75.3%), for extent in 63.6%, for extraintestinal manifestations in 70.1%, and for smoking history in 85%. The median age of onset in parents was significantly higher than in offspring (p = less than 0.0001). In 40 pairs (60.6%) the parent was at least 10 years older than the child at age of onset. Sibs were concordant for disease type in 81.6% of the affected sib pairs, extent in 76.0%, extraintestinal manifestations in 83.8%, and smoking history in 81.3%. In contrast with the parent-child pairs, 68.1% of sibs (111 sib pairs) were diagnosed within 10 years of each other. Median age of onset was 24.0 years. Satsangi et al. (1996) felt that the differences in age of onset between parents and children was not readily explained by a simple cohort effect or ascertainment bias, and may it reflect effects of genetic factors, producing anticipation between generations. |About 10% of persons with regional enteritis have 1 or more close relatives with granulomatous disease of the bowel. In 5 persons of Ashkenazi Jewish origin (ancestors from area of Russia-Poland around Vilna), Sheehan et al. (1967) found red cell glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency associated with regional enteritis or granulomatous colitis. The affected persons were 2 males and 3 females. Regional enteritis and sarcoidosis have been observed in the same family (see 181000); Gronhagen-Riska et al. (1983) commented on the association. Schwartz et al. (1980) found no HLA association in sporadic cases or in familial cases. However, in 5 affected sib pairs, 4 shared both haplotypes (i.e., were HLA-identical) and the 5th shared one haplotype. Only 1 unaffected sib shared both haplotypes with an affected sib. Kuster et al. (1989) suggested that a recessive gene with incomplete penetrance is responsible for susceptibility to Crohn disease. McConnell (1988) suggested polygenic inheritance; an individual inheriting few susceptibility genes would develop ulcerative colitis, while someone inheriting a larger number of these genes would develop regional enteritis. |Although controversial, epidemiologic evidence (Greenstein et al., 1988) suggests that there may be 2 distinct clinical forms of Crohn disease: perforating and nonperforating. Patients with perforating Crohn disease have abscesses and/or free perforations. Perforating Crohn disease is the more aggressive form with a higher reoperation rate. By contrast, nonperforating Crohn disease has a more indolent clinical course and is associated with obstruction and bleeding as the main features. Gilberts et al. (1994) reasoned that the host immune response may determine which clinical presentation the disease assumes. Leprosy is an incontrovertible example of 2 clinical forms of disease, tuberculous and lepromatous, with the same etiologic factor. Resected intestinal tissue from control patients, as well as perforating and nonperforating Crohn disease patients, was evaluated for mRNA levels of a housekeeping gene (beta-actin; 102630), a human T-cell marker, CD3-delta (186790), and 6 cytokines. Differences were observed with interleukin-1-beta (IL1B; 147720) and with interleukin-1 receptor alpha (IL1RA; 147810). Nonperforating Crohn disease, the more benign form, was associated with increased IL1B and IL1RA mRNA expression. |
219150::this form of de Barsy syndrome (ARCL3A) is caused by homozygous mutation in the ALDH18A1 gene (138250) on chromosome 10q24.|Heterozygous mutation in ALDH18A1 can cause an autosomal dominant form of cutis laxa (ADCL3; 616603).|De Barsy syndrome, or autosomal recessive cutis laxa type III (ARCL3), is characterized by cutis laxa, a progeria-like appearance, and ophthalmologic abnormalities (summary by Kivuva et al., 2008). |For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of autosomal recessive cutis laxa, see 219100.|Also see ARCL3B (614438), caused by mutation in the PYCR1 gene (179035) on chromosome 17q25.|De Barsy et al. (1968) described a 22-month-old girl who had cutis laxa with defective development of elastic fibers in the skin. The corneas were cloudy due to degeneration in the Bowman membrane. Psychomotor development was retarded and she was generally hypotonic. There was no known parental consanguinity, the father being Greek and the mother Flemish. |Hoefnagel et al. (1971) reported a male with similar features. The patient had congenital bilateral athetosis. The authors pointed out that the case of de Barsy et al. (1968) also had athetosis. Burck (1974) reported the same condition. All of these were sporadic cases. |Pontz et al. (1986) described a 6-month-old Turkish boy, the son of first-cousin parents, who had typical features of this condition at 7 days of age. He was admitted to hospital for surgical treatment of a large inguinal hernia. Superficial blood vessels were unusually evident because of a translucent quality of the skin. A wizened face was a striking feature. The corneas were cloudy, with arcus senilis bilaterally and a polar cataract on the right. The thumbs and great toes as well as both hips were dislocated. Elastic fibers in the skin were frayed and reduced in number and density. The collagen fibril network was judged to be normal. |Morris and Clark (1990) reported a case and reviewed the findings in 15 reported cases.|Rabier et al. (1992) reported 2 children, born of consanguineous Algerian parents, who presented in early infancy with failure to thrive, vomiting, and progressive neurologic dysfunction. Bilateral subcapsular cataracts were noted by age 2 years. Both had mental retardation (IQ of 50), hypotonia with joint laxity, and hyperelastic skin. Motor handicap resulted in loss of walking ability by age 12 years. Metabolic studies repeatedly showed hyperammonemia, hypoornithinemia, hypocitrullinemia, hypoargininemia, and hypoprolinemia. Kamoun et al. (1998) and Baumgartner et al. (2000) reported the same family. |Kivuva et al. (2008) reported a female infant, the second child of first-cousin parents from a multiply consanguineous family of Pakistani origin, who presented at birth with growth retardation, cutis laxa, and a progeria-like appearance. She had thin, overlapping fingers and adducted thumbs, blue sclerae, cloudy corneas, and myopia. She showed failure to thrive and had marked developmental delay and abnormal athetoid movements. During the first year of life, she developed pectus excavatum, and her facial appearance became more aged. The findings were typical of classic de Barsy syndrome. Kivuva et al. (2008) stated that 27 cases had been reported in the literature. |Bicknell et al. (2008) reported a New Zealand Maori family in which 4 sibs had a syndrome characterized by microcephaly, global neurodevelopmental delay with no speech development, and connective tissue abnormalities. The skin over the hands, feet, abdomen, chest, and face was very wrinkled and lax, although not hyperelastic; wounds healed normally without excessive scarring. The wrinkliness of the skin disappeared with age and was no longer clinically evident by adolescence. All had hypermobility of the joints, 3 with hip dislocation, and mild short stature. A progeroid appearance was noted, although no photographs were provided. At ages 22, 12, 11, and 4 years, respectively, affected individuals had difficulty walking associated with increased tone in the lower limbs and distal muscle wasting. One patient had bilateral lamellar nuclear cataracts. Extensive biochemical investigations showed no abnormalities. Bicknell et al. (2008) noted the phenotypic similarities to de Barsy syndrome but suggested that the disorder in the family they described differed by the lack of corneal clouding. |Skidmore et al. (2011) reported a male infant born to consanguineous Pakistani parents. Decreased fetal movements and severe intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) were noted, and the child was delivered at term by cesarean section with a weight of 1.52 kg. Scalp hair was sparse and dry; skin was thin, wrinkled, and loose, with a parchment paper-like texture and poor elasticity especially over the upper arms and face. Blood vessels were clearly visible through the skin covering the torso. The patient had a high forehead with frontal bossing, depressed nasal bridge, short upturned nose with hypoplastic nasal alae, and thin lips. Eyes were deep-set with cloudy corneas, jowls of the cheek were prominent, palate was high-arched but intact, and micrognathia was present. Overall appearance was progeroid. He had multiple joint contractures with clenched fists. Breathing was irregular. Chest radiographs showed eventration of the medial aspect of the right diaphragm, thin ribs, and normal lung parenchyma. Echocardiography showed ventricular septal defect, persistent foramen ovale, and mild proximal pulmonary artery branch stenosis. Brain MRI showed tortuosity of all blood vessels, including the middle cerebral artery, and bifurcation of the basilar artery. Corneal transplant was undertaken in infancy but no vision developed. Examination of the corneal explant demonstrated absence of the Bowman membrane. The corneal epithelium was thickened and there was increased cellularity in the substantia propia. The infant had poor suck and swallow and developed seizures at 2 weeks of age. Over the next several months, the translucency of the skin decreased but did not normalize and the scalp hair remained sparse. The loose redundant folds of skin with poor elasticity became more marked over time and the appearance became more in keeping with cutis laxa. By age 3 months, bilateral inguinal hernias were present. The child remained in hospital with severe failure to thrive, and was discharged home at age 3 months. He died suddenly at age 6 months. His development was never formally assessed, but little developmental progression was noted. |Fischer et al. (2014) reported 2 patients with classic features of de Barsy syndrome. The female patient was the first child of a consanguineous Tunisian couple. She exhibited intrauterine growth restriction, and at age 18 months had disseminated tremors. She had no structural brain abnormalities. Craniofacial dysmorphic features included a triangular face, malar hypoplasia, prognathism, and prominent ears, leading to a prematurely aged appearance. She had mild cataract as well as thin, lax, and wrinkled skin at the abdomen and the dorsum of hands and feet. Visibility of veins was also observed. She had hand and foot contractures, hypotonia, kyphosis, bilateral hearing loss, and cardiovascular problems, including ventricular septal defect, atrial septal defect (ostium secundum type), patent ductus arteriosus, and persistence of superior left vena cava. The second patient was the male offspring of a consanguineous Turkish couple. He had intrauterine growth restriction and agenesis of the corpus callosum. He presented with seizures and had a typical facial gestalt, prominent ears, and corneal clouding. He had remarkably thin, translucent, lax, and wrinkled skin as well as a narrow aortic arch without a clear stenosis. He died at 3 months of age due to progressive respiratory failure and urosepsis. |Wolthuis et al. (2014) described a 2-year-old boy, born to consanguineous parents, who was noted at birth to have severely wrinkled skin on the thorax and abdomen with visible veins, bilateral hip dislocations, wrist contractures, and adducted thumbs. He also exhibited kyphosis and calcaneovalgus feet. Other features included large anterior fontanel, microcephaly, high-arched palate, dysmorphic ears, right inguinal hernia, undescended testes, and abnormal fat pads on the buttocks and upper thighs. The child had growth delay and failure to thrive, and developed seizures and spasticity. Ophthalmologic examination revealed blue sclerae but no cataract, and there was abnormal pigmentation in the retinal periphery with salt-and-pepper appearance of the fundus. Cerebral MRI showed diffuse thinning of the corpus callosum and mild enlargement of temporal horns. |
219500::cystathioninuria is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding cystathionine gamma-lyase (CTH; 607657) on chromosome 1p31.|Cystathioninuria, an autosomal recessive phenotype with no striking pathologic features, is characterized by abnormal accumulation of plasma cystathionine, leading to increased urinary excretion. Because of the inconsistency and wide variety of disease associations, cystathioninuria is considered to be a benign biochemical anomaly (Mudd et al., 2001).|
219700::cystic fibrosis is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the cystic fibrosis conductance regulator gene (CFTR; 602421) on chromosome 7q31.|Formerly known as cystic fibrosis of the pancreas, this entity has increasingly been labeled simply 'cystic fibrosis.' Manifestations relate not only to the disruption of exocrine function of the pancreas but also to intestinal glands (meconium ileus), biliary tree (biliary cirrhosis), bronchial glands (chronic bronchopulmonary infection with emphysema), and sweat glands (high sweat electrolyte with depletion in a hot environment). Infertility occurs in males and females.|For discussion of a phenotype consisting of bronchiectasis with or without elevated sweat chloride caused by mutation in the genes encoding the 3 subunits of the epithelial sodium channel, see BESC1 (211400).|The mildest extreme of CF is represented by patients not diagnosed until middle age (Scully et al., 1977). The phenotypic variability in CF was analyzed by Sing et al. (1982). In an inbred kindred in North Carolina, a mild form of cystic fibrosis was described by Knowles et al. (1989). There was 1 instance of mother-daughter involvement, the mother being related to her husband. One of the presumed homozygotes was a 62-year-old woman. Another was her 52-year-old sister, the mother of the affected proposita. The daughter was an intensive care nurse, the mother of a normal daughter. Manifestations in the family were predominantly pulmonary; pancreatic exocrine insufficiency was not a conspicuous feature, especially in the older patients. |The 2 subgroups defined by the A and C haplotypes of polymorphisms closely linked to the CF locus on chromosome 7, reported by Estivill et al. (1987), have clinical differences in terms of the frequency of meconium ileus, pseudomonas infections, and pancreatic disease (Woo, 1988). |Gasparini et al. (1990) described a RFLP DNA marker closely linked to the CF locus which showed an allelic correlation with severity of the disorder: the genotype 2/2 was associated with severe disease; the genotype 1/2 was overrepresented in patients with very mild clinical manifestations, including pancreatic insufficiency, absence of meconium ileus, and absence of Pseudomonas colonization. |Allan et al. (1981) showed that sibs tend to show recurrence of meconium ileus as a feature of cystic fibrosis. The distal intestinal obstruction syndrome is a 'meconium ileus equivalent' that occurs in adolescents and adults with CF. It is the consequence of the abnormally viscid mucofeculant material in the terminal ileum and right colon, where the fecal stream is normally liquid. Typical features are recurrent episodes of RLQ pain with palpable mass in the right iliac fossa. Symptoms are exacerbated by eating. |Mornet et al. (1988) determined the haplotype associated with cystic fibrosis in 41 families using 4 DNA probes, all of which are tightly linked to the CF gene. In 17 of the families an affected child had meconium ileus, and in the other 24 families there was a child without meconium ileus. A different haplotype was associated with the 2 types of families, suggesting that multiple allelism, i.e., different mutations at the same locus, accounts for CF with or without meconium ileus. |Gaskin et al. (1988) found that 96% of patients with cystic fibrosis and evidence of liver disease had biliary tract obstruction, usually a stricture of the distal common bile duct. All patients without liver disease had normal intrahepatic and common-duct excretion of tracer. |Bilton et al. (1990) described a case of cystic fibrosis complicated by common bile duct stenosis. |Gabolde et al. (2001) showed that the presence of cirrhosis in patients with cystic fibrosis is significantly associated with either homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the MBL2 gene (154545), which encodes mannose-binding lectin (MBL). The authors compared 216 patients homozygous for the delta-F508 mutation (602421.0001) and found that 5.4% of those homozygous or compound heterozygous for wildtype mannose-binding lectin had cirrhosis, while 30.8% of those homozygous or compound heterozygous for mutant alleles had cirrhosis (p = 0.008). |Approximately 3 to 5% of patients with cystic fibrosis develop severe liver disease defined as cirrhosis with portal hypertension. Bartlett et al. (2009) performed a 2-stage case control study enrolling patients with CF and severe liver disease with portal hypertension from 63 CF centers in the United States as well as 32 in Canada and 18 outside of North America. In the first stage, 124 patients with CF and severe liver disease, enrolled between January 1999 and December 2004, and 843 control patients without CF-related liver disease (all assessed at greater than 15 years of age) were studied by genotyping 9 polymorphisms in 5 genes previously studied as modifiers of liver disease in CF. In the second stage, the 2 genes that were positive from the first stage were tested in an additional 136 patients with CF-related liver disease, enrolled between January 2005 and February 2007, and in 1,088 with no CF-related liver disease. The combined analysis of the initial and replication studies by logistic regression showed CF-related liver disease to be associated with the SERPINA1 Z allele (107400.0011) (odds ratio = 5.04; 95% confidence interval, 2.88-8.83; p = 1.5 x 10(-8)). Bartlett et al. (2009) concluded that the SERPINA1 Z allele is a risk factor for liver disease in CF. Patients carrying the Z allele are at greater risk (odds ratio = approximately 5) of developing severe liver disease with portal hypertension. |Approximately 15% of CF patients do not have pancreatic insufficiency, i.e., are 'pancreatic sufficient.' Kerem et al. (1989) performed linkage disequilibrium and haplotype association studies of patients in 2 clinical subgroups, one pancreatic insufficient (PI) and the other pancreatic sufficient (PS). Significant differences were found in allelic and haplotype distributions in the 2 groups. The data suggested that most of the CF-PI patients were descendants of a single mutational event at the CF locus, whereas the CF-PS patients resulted from multiple, different mutations. Corey et al. (1989) commented on the intrafamilial concordance for pancreatic insufficiency in CF. |Devoto et al. (1989) studied the allele and haplotype frequencies of 5 polymorphic DNA markers near the CF locus in 355 CF patients from Belgium, the German Democratic Republic, Greece, and Italy who were divided into 2 groups according to whether or not they were taking supplementary pancreatic enzymes. The distributions of alleles and haplotypes revealed by 2 of the probes were always different in patients with or without pancreatic insufficiency in all the populations studied. In the case of 1 haplotype that was present in 73% of all the CF chromosomes in their sample, they found homozygosity in only 28% of patients without pancreatic insufficiency as contrasted with 64% who were homozygous and had pancreatic insufficiency. Like other workers, they concluded that this indicated that pancreatic insufficiency and sufficiency are associated with different mutations at the CF locus. |Barreto et al. (1991) concluded that the father of a girl with severe CF also had CF but was mildly affected. The child was homozygous for the delta-F508 mutation associated with haplotype B; the father was a compound heterozygote for this mutation and a second CF mutation associated with haplotype C. Perhaps it should not be surprising that some patients with cystic fibrosis have no pancreatic lesions (Oppenheimer, 1972). |Sharer et al. (1998) and Cohn et al. (1998) demonstrated that heterozygosity for CFTR mutations can lead to 'idiopathic' chronic pancreatitis, especially when the mutation is associated with the 5T allele of the variable number of thymidines in intron 8 of the CFTR gene. |Pier et al. (1996) provided an experimental explanation for the susceptibility of CF patients to chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa lung infections. They found that cultured human airway epithelial cells expressing the delta-F508 allele of the CFTR gene were defective in uptake of P. aeruginosa compared with cells expressing the wildtype allele. P. aeruginosa lipopolysaccharide-core oligosaccharide was identified as the bacterial ligand for epithelial cell ingestion; exogenous oligosaccharide inhibited bacterial ingestion in a neonatal mouse model, resulting in increased amounts of bacteria in the lungs. The authors concluded that CFTR may normally contribute to a host-defense mechanism that is important for clearance of P. aeruginosa from the respiratory tract.|Davies et al. (2000) found that MBL binds to Burkholderia cepacia, an important pathogen in patients with CF, and leads to complement activation, but that this was not the case for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, the more common colonizing organism in CF. Davies et al. (2000) suggested that patients with CF and mannose-binding lectin deficiency would be at a particularly high risk of B. cepacia colonization. The lack of binding to P. aeruginosa suggests that the effect of this organism on lung function in patients with MBL-deficient CF reflects a role for MBL, either in intercurrent infections with other organisms, or in the inflammatory process. |In an association study involving 112 patients with cystic fibrosis, Yarden et al. (2004) found that patients with the MBL2 A/O or O/O genotypes were more likely to have a more severe pulmonary phenotype than patients with the A/A genotype (p = 0.002). No association was found between the MBL2 genotype and the age at first infection with P. aeruginosa. Yarden et al. (2004) concluded that it is very likely that MBL2 is a modulating factor in cystic fibrosis. |In 69 Italian patients with CF due to homozygosity for the delF508 mutation in the CFTR gene (F508del; 602421.0001), De Rose et al. (2005) found that those who also carried the R131 allele of the immunoglobulin Fc-gamma receptor II gene (FCGR2A; see 146790.0001) had a 4-fold increased risk of acquiring chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection (p = 0.042). De Rose et al. (2005) suggested that FCGR2A locus variability contributes to this infection susceptibility in CF patients. |Oppenheimer et al. (1970) suggested that characteristics of cervical mucus may account for infertility in females with cystic fibrosis. Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD; 277180) is a usual cause of male infertility in cystic fibrosis. It also occurs with CFTR mutations in heterozygous state, especially when associated with the polymorphic number of thymidines in intron 8, specifically the 5T allele. |Siraganian et al. (1987) pointed to adenocarcinoma of the ileum in 3 males with cystic fibrosis. The diagnosis was made between ages 29 and 34 years. |From a pancreatic adenocarcinoma developing in a 26-year-old patient with cystic fibrosis due to the phenylalanine-508 deletion, Schoumacher et al. (1990) established a cell line in which the cells showed morphologic and chemical characteristics typical of pancreatic duct cells and showed physiologic properties of CF cells. Schoumacher et al. (1990) suggested that the cell line, which had been stable through more than 80 passages over a 2-year period, could serve as a continuous cell line for studies of the CF defect. Bradbury et al. (1992) demonstrated that the CFTR protein is involved in cAMP-dependent regulation of endocytosis and exocytosis. In a study of pancreatic cancer cells derived from a CF patient, they found that plasma membrane recycling did not occur until normal CFTR was provided. |Patients with cystic fibrosis have altered levels of plasma fatty acids. Affected tissues from cystic fibrosis knockout mice show elevated levels of arachidonic acid and decreased levels of docosahexaenoic acid. Freedman et al. (2004) performed studies of fatty acids in nasal and rectal biopsy specimens, nasal epithelial scrapings, and plasma from 38 patients with cystic fibrosis, and found alterations in fatty acids similar to those in the knockout mice. |Delayed puberty is common among individuals with cystic fibrosis and is usually attributed to chronic disease and/or poor nutrition. However, delayed puberty has been reported as a feature of CF even in the setting of good nutritional and clinical status (Johannesson et al., 1997). |
219750::ocular nonnephropathic cystinosis is caused by mutation in the gene encoding cystinosin (CTNS; 606272), which maps to chromosome 17p13.|Ocular nonnephropathic cystinosis, a variant of the classic nephropathic type of cystinosis (219800), is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder characterized by photophobia due to corneal cystine crystals but absence of renal disease (summary by Anikster et al., 2000). |Lietman et al. (1966) observed a benign form of cystinosis in 3 affected sibs of cousin parents. The ages of the patients were 53, 50, and 42 years. Crystals of cystine were demonstrated in the cornea, buffy coat of the blood, and bone marrow. No amino aciduria or impairment of renal function was found. Cogan et al. (1958) described an asymptomatic adult with cystine demonstrable in cornea and bone marrow. Although the patients with adult cystinosis show characteristic crystals in the cornea, conjunctiva, circulating white cells and bone marrow, no evidence of renal tubular dysfunction is found. Some reported cases of familial crystalline corneal dystrophy may be examples of this condition. Deposits resembling those of cystinosis occur in the cornea in patients with dysproteinemia, such as in multiple myeloma (Burki, 1958). |Schneider et al. (1968) reported studies of 3 adult cystinosis cases. The intracellular deposits of free cystine appear to be unavailable for sustaining normal metabolism since fibroblasts from either the children or the adult type are not viable in a cystine-free medium. The intracellular content of cystine is lower in the adult form than in the childhood form, yet higher than in the heterozygote for the childhood form. Retinal lesions occur in the childhood form but not the adult form and may be responsible for the photophobia which is much more a feature of the childhood form. An abnormality in heterozygotes was demonstrated by Schneider et al. (1967) who found the concentration of free cystine to be about 6 times normal in the leukocytes of parents of patients. Brubaker et al. (1970) described brother and sister, aged 16 and 11 years, respectively. Since they had no proteinuria or other clinical abnormality, except for crystalline corneal deposits, their disorder fits the 'adult' type rather than the juvenile or adolescent type. |
220100::cystinuria can be caused by mutation in the SLC3A1 amino acid transporter gene (104614), which encodes the heavy subunit of the renal amino acid transporter and is located on chromosome 2p, and/or by mutation in the SLC7A9 gene (604144), which encodes the light subunit and is located on chromosome 19. A classification scheme of cystinuria based on the molecular genetics of the disorder has been proposed (see NOMENCLATURE).|Cystinuria is an autosomal disorder characterized by impaired epithelial cell transport of cystine and dibasic amino acids (lysine, ornithine, and arginine) in the proximal renal tubule and gastrointestinal tract. The impaired renal reabsorption of cystine and its low solubility causes the formation of calculi in the urinary tract, resulting in obstructive uropathy, pyelonephritis, and, rarely, renal failure (summary by Barbosa et al., 2012). |Wollaston (1810) first described a cystine stone. He found that a glistening yellow bladder stone was composed of an unusual substance, which he called cystic oxide since it came from the bladder. Later analysis showed this to be a sulfur-containing amino acid and so this stone ultimately gave its name not only to cystinuria but also to the amino acids cystine and cysteine. Marcet (1817) showed that cystine stones occur also in the kidney. He suspected that the condition might be familial since 2 of his patients were brothers. Cystinuria was one of the 4 inborn errors of metabolism discussed by Garrod (1908).|Rosenberg et al. (1966) described 3 forms of cystinuria, each due to presumed homozygosity of a particular mutant allele at 1 locus. In cystinuria I, the homozygote excretes relatively large amounts of cystine, lysine, arginine and ornithine in the urine. Heterozygotes (e.g., parents) have no abnormal amino aciduria. Urinary stones form in all 3 types of cystinuria because of the limited solubility of this amino acid. Cystinuria II is incompletely recessive because heterozygotes have a moderate degree of amino aciduria, mainly cystine and lysine, and may occasionally form cystine stones. Observations in kindreds in which both cystinuria I and cystinuria II are segregating demonstrate that the genes for these are allelic (Hershko et al., 1965). In cystinuria III, intestinal transport of all dibasic amino acids is retained by heterozygotes, and homozygotes excrete cystine in slight excess. Rosenberg (1966) and others observed families in which 'doubly heterozygous' persons (I-II, I-III, or II-III) had full-blown cystinuria. The findings were best explained on the basis of allelism of the genes responsible for the 3 types. |Brodehl et al. (1967) reported a 2-year-old girl who was discovered to have isolated hypercystinuria with normal urine levels of arginine, lysine, and ornithine during an evaluation for candidiasis. A younger brother had the same pattern of urinary amino acid excretion. Their unrelated parents and an older sister had normal cystine excretion. The female proband was also noted to have isolated hyperparathyroidism, which was suspected to be familial because another sister and brother had died due to hypocalcemic tetany. |Scriver et al. (1970) presented evidence indicating that cystinuria patients are at increased risk for impaired cerebral function. Weinberger et al. (1974) demonstrated an unusually high frequency of type II or III cystinuria among Libyan Jews. |Kelly (1978) concluded that the excretion rates of obligate carriers among the relatives of cystinurics suffice to determine the type of cystinuria in the proband. Among 17 patients he studied, type I was the most frequent type and often occurred in compound heterozygotes with type III. When obligatory heterozygotes showed normal amounts of cystine and dibasic amino acids in the urine, they were called type I. When up to twice the normal range was excreted in the urine, they were called type III. When carriers excreted large amounts of cystine and lysine (9-15 times the normal range but less than in most stone-formers), they were called type II. On the basis of a study in Brazil, Giugliani et al. (1985) concluded that there is an increased frequency of heterozygotes for types II and III cystinuria among urinary stone-formers and that heterozygosity for these genes is a risk factor for urinary stones. |
179780::DPEP1 (EC 3.4.13.11) is a kidney membrane enzyme that hydrolyzes a variety of dipeptides and is implicated in renal metabolism of glutathione and its conjugates, e.g., leukotriene D4 (Kozak and Tate, 1982). DPEP1 is responsible for hydrolysis of the beta-lactam ring of antibiotics, such as penem and carbapenem (Campbell et al., 1984). Earlier, beta-lactamase enzymes were thought to occur only in bacteria, where their probable function was in protecting the organisms against the action of beta-lactam antibiotics. These antibiotics exhibit selective toxicity against bacteria but virtual inertness against many eukaryotic cells (Adachi et al., 1990). |
220110::cytochrome c oxidase deficiency can be caused by mutation in several nuclear-encoded and mitochondrial-encoded genes. Mutations associated with the disorder have been identified in several mitochondrial COX genes (MTCO1, 516030; MTCO2, 516040, MTCO3, 516050), as well as in mitochondrial tRNA(ser) (MTTS1, 590080) and tRNA(leu) (MTTL1; 590050).|Mutations in nuclear genes include those in COX10 (602125), COX6B1 (124089), SCO1 (603644), FASTKD2 (612322), C12ORF62 (COX14; 614478), COX20 (614698), APOPT1 (616003), COA3 (614775), COX8A (123870), and COA7 (615623).|COX deficiency caused by mutation in the SCO2 (604272), COX15 (603646), COA5 (613920), and COA6 (614772) genes has been found to be specifically associated with fatal infantile cardioencephalomyopathy (see, e.g., CEMCOX1, 604377).|Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency associated with Leigh syndrome (see 256000) can be caused by mutation in the SURF1 gene (185620), COX15 gene (603646), TACO1 gene (612958), or PET100 gene (614770). Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency associated with the French Canadian type of Leigh syndrome (LSFC; 220111) is caused by mutation in the LRPPRC gene (607544).|Complex IV (cytochrome c oxidase; EC 1.9.3.1) is the terminal enzyme of the respiratory chain and consists of 13 polypeptide subunits, 3 of which are encoded by mitochondrial DNA. The 3 mitochondrially encoded proteins in the cytochrome oxidase complex are the actual catalytic subunits that carry out the electron transport function (Saraste, 1983). See 123995 for discussion of some of the nuclear-encoded subunits.|Shoubridge (2001) provided a comprehensive review of cytochrome c oxidase deficiency and noted that most isolated COX deficiencies are inherited as autosomal recessive disorders caused by mutations in nuclear-encoded genes; mutations in the mtDNA-encoded COX subunit genes are relatively rare. |Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency is clinically heterogeneous, ranging from isolated myopathy to severe multisystem disease, with onset from infancy to adulthood (Shoubridge, 2001). |Van Biervliet et al. (1977) described a Dutch family in which 3 sibs, including twin sisters, died of infantile mitochondrial myopathy, lactic acidosis, and de Toni-Fanconi-Debre renal syndrome due to cytochrome c oxidase deficiency. Lipid droplets and focal glycogen accumulation could be attributed to blockage of terminal oxidative metabolism. A similar defect in the renal tubule was presumably responsible for proteinuria, glycosuria, hyperphosphaturia, hypercalciuria, and generalized amino aciduria. Heart, liver, and brain were spared. |Willems et al. (1977) reported an association between cytochrome c oxidase deficiency and Leigh encephalomyelopathy in a child who died at age 6 years. See 256000 for a full discussion of COX deficiency associated with Leigh syndrome. |DiMauro et al. (1980) reported an infant with hypotonia, ptosis, diminished reflexes, poor suck, lactic acidosis, proteinuria, glucosuria, and amino aciduria who died at age 3.5 months. Muscle biopsy showed increased lipid droplets and abnormal mitochondria. Cytochrome c oxidase was decreased in skeletal muscle and kidney. Muller-Hocker et al. (1983) studied 2 Turkish sisters who developed apathy, failure of suckling, and generalized progressive muscular hypotonia in the newborn period and died at age 7 weeks. Both children had generalized hyperaminoaciduria. Hepatic encephalopathy was absent. Autopsy showed fatty metamorphosis of the liver, bilateral hydroureters, renotubular calcifications, and generalized lipid storage myopathy, mainly in type I fibers. Cytochrome c oxidase activity was absent not only in the myopathic fibers but also in 'most of the morphologically unchanged muscle fibers.' |Eshel et al. (1991) described an inbred Bedouin kindred with 6 affected children in 3 sibships related as double first cousins. They had a mitochondrial myopathy presenting with progressive muscular weakness, failure to thrive, proximal renal tubular acidosis, and lactic acidemia leading to death. The affected children were 3 females and 3 males. Of the children studied most extensively, 2 died at age 5 months and 1 at age 16 months. Cytochrome c oxidase was markedly reduced in skeletal muscle extracts of all 3. The findings were those described originally by Van Biervliet et al. (1977). |Chabrol et al. (1994) described a 3-year-old girl who, after 3 months of treatment with valproate for myoclonic epilepsy, developed fatal hepatic failure. Deficiency of cytochrome c oxidase found in circulating lymphocytes and in postmortem liver and cultured skin fibroblasts was thought to have rendered the patient susceptible to hepatic failure. A fully functional respiratory chain was found in muscle. Valproate sensitivity has been described in association with ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (311250), argininemia (207800), and citrullinemia (215700), all causes of hyperammonemia. |Bakker et al. (1996) reported the case of a boy, a second child of nonconsanguineous parents, who was born after a term pregnancy and normal delivery. It was the third pregnancy of the mother: the first ended at 19 weeks with death in utero of twins; the second ended at term with the birth of a healthy boy. The patient was admitted to hospital at the age of 1 day for evaluation of feeding difficulties and tachypnea. Laboratory investigations revealed severe metabolic acidosis with elevated lactate and pyruvate levels. In fibroblasts, lymphoblasts, and liver, complex IV showed about a 2-fold reduction in enzymatic activity; in muscle the reduction was more severe. Structural and functional abnormalities of the brain became evident after the initial lactic acidosis had been corrected by treatment. Periventricular leukomalacia was absent, whereas myelination had progressed around the lateral ventricles, the anterior and posterior capsular limbs, and the thalamus. A remarkable subcortical atrophy of the cerebellar hemispheres was present, and the cerebellum was affected by severe atrophy of both the vermis and the cerebellar hemispheres. Bakker et al. (1996) reported that the abnormalities found on neuroimaging reflected a progressive brain disorder rather than sequelae of perinatal injury, but noted that MRI findings typical of Leigh syndrome, another presentation of COX deficiency (DiMauro et al., 1994), were not found in this patient. The authors suggested that this case was a rare type of early-onset progressive encephalopathy associated with COX deficiency. |In a study of 157 patients with respiratory chain defects, von Kleist-Retzow et al. (1998) found that the deficiency resided in complex I in 33%, in complex IV in 28%, and in complex I and IV in 28%. Deficiency of complex II and complex III accounted for 4% and 7% of cases, respectively. The main clinical features in this series were truncal hypotonia (36%), antenatal (20%) and postnatal (31%) growth retardation, cardiomyopathy (24%), encephalopathy (20%), and liver failure (20%). No correlation was found between the type of respiratory chain defect and the clinical presentation, but complex I and complex I+IV deficiencies were significantly more frequent in cases of cardiomyopathy (P less than 0.01) and hepatic failure (P less than 0.05), respectively. For the entire series the sex ratio was mostly balanced but was skewed toward males being affected with complex I deficiency. A high rate of parental consanguinity was observed in complex IV (20%) and complex I+IV (28%) deficiencies, and in North African families (76%), suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance. |Rubio-Gozalbo et al. (1999) reported a boy with features of spinal muscular atrophy who presented with hypotonia, severe axial and limb weakness with frog posture, but normal bulbar musculature. The boy died at the age of 5 months from progressive respiratory failure. EMG showed a patchy distribution of positive sharp waves and fibrillation potentials, but normal motor nerve conduction velocities. Muscle biopsy showed a preponderance of type I fibers, with atrophy of both fiber types. An asymptomatic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was present. Cytochrome c oxidase activity was absent from all but intrafusal muscle fibers and the activity was reduced in cultured skin fibroblasts. Western blot analysis demonstrated decreased levels of all COX subunits. Analysis of mitochondrial DNA and the SMN gene were unrevealing. |Ghezzi et al. (2008) reported 2 children of a consanguineous Bedouin couple who had a total of 7 children. The first child was a female born at term after an uneventful pregnancy by cesarean section due to nonprogression of labor. She had bilateral congenital hip dislocation present at birth. Social and motor development were reported as normal until 7 months of age. At that time she suffered from febrile illness and developed refractory generalized tonic-clonic convulsions. Brain MRI showed generalized symmetric atrophy, and she subsequently developed psychomotor delay and left-sided hemiplegia with facial nerve involvement. CT scan at 5 years of age showed severe atrophic changes on the right hemisphere. Plasma lactate was mildly increased (2.4-3.2 mM in different samples). At 14 years of age, she was able to obey simple commands in 2 languages, could recognize colors, and had a 20-word vocabulary. She could sit herself up and move herself relatively smoothly along the floor while sitting, but was never able to stand or walk. Her hearing was intact but eyesight was impaired because of bilateral optic atrophy. She had left spastic hemiparesis; on the right side muscle tone was decreased with reduced strength. The EEG revealed bilateral epileptic activity. Biochemical assays on isolated mitochondria showed reduced activity of cytochrome C oxidase, to 21% of the control mean. All other mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex were within normal limits. The second child, male, was the sixth child of the couple, born at term with uneventful early development. After a febrile gastroenteritis at 1 year of age, the patient experienced subacute neurologic deterioration with muscle hypotonia and extrapyramidal movements, mainly in the left limbs. Brain MRI disclosed increased signal intensities on the left caudate nucleus, globus pallidus, and crus cerebri. Epilepsy, first noted at around 1 year, became refractory to treatment in the third year of life. The patient experienced prolonged episodes of status epilepticus. A brain CT scan at 30 months revealed generalized and white matter atrophy, more pronounced on the left basal ganglia, with bilateral dilatation of the ventricles and basal cysternae. At 4 years he was bedridden with neither communication nor any voluntary activity. He had bilateral optic atrophy and strabismus. Muscle tone was decreased with hyperreflexia and dystonic posturing. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) lactate was increased to 3.8 mM (normal less than 1.8 mM), and the activity of COX in his lymphocytes was reported as markedly decreased. Plasma lactate was normal. In both sibs echocardiography, abdominal ultrasound, blood count, and liver and renal function tests were normal. |Lim et al. (2014) reported 10 patients from 8 Lebanese families with Leigh syndrome due to complex IV deficiency. The transmission pattern was consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance. During the first year of life, the patients presented with delayed psychomotor development, irritability, hypotonia, and seizures. Some patients had paucity of movement, poor head control, poor visual fixation, hearing deficit, and periods of apnea. Laboratory studies showed increased serum lactate, and isolated decrease of mitochondrial complex IV activity in muscle and fibroblasts (median values 18 to 25% of normal). Brain MRI showed enlarged ventricles and signal abnormalities in the basal ganglia. Several patients died within the first years of life, and those that survived developed spastic quadriplegia, kyphoscoliosis, and profound neurologic impairment. |Hallmann et al. (2016) reported a 12.5-year-old girl, born of likely related Turkish parents, with COX deficiency associated with a homozygous splice site mutation in the COX8A gene (123870.0001). She presented at birth with scoliosis, thoracolumbar kyphosis, and pes planovalgus. At 6 months, she had global developmental delay and primary pulmonary hypertension. She also had poor feeding necessitating a feeding tube, short stature, microcephaly, proximal hypotonia, distal spasticity, and onset of severe refractory epilepsy at age 8 years. She had bilateral hip dislocation and was wheelchair-bound. Laboratory studies showed increased serum and CSF lactate. EEG showed generalized slowing and continuous multifocal spike-wave discharges; brain imaging showed T2-weighted hyperintensities in the cerebellum and periventricular areas, suggestive of Leigh syndrome. Additional findings included ventricular enlargement and cystic defects. The patient died at age 12.5 years from cardiopulmonary failure associated with infection and metabolic crisis. Patient skeletal muscle and fibroblasts showed about 10% residual complex IV activity and a marked reduction of the fully assembled COX complex, consistent with a loss of function. |
615182::combined D-2- and L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SLC25A1 gene (190315) on chromosome 22q11.Biallelic mutation in the SLC25A1 gene can also cause congenital myasthenic syndrome-23 (CMS23; 618197), a less severe disorder.|Combined D-2- and L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (D-2-HG and L-2-HG) is an autosomal recessive neurometabolic disorder characterized by neonatal-onset encephalopathy with severe muscular weakness, intractable seizures, respiratory distress, and lack of psychomotor development resulting in early death. Brain imaging shows abnormalities including enlarged ventricles, delayed myelination, and germinal layer cysts (summary by Muntau et al., 2000). See also isolated L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (236792) and isolated D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (see 600721).|Muntau et al. (2000) reported 3 patients, including 2 sibs, with severe neonatal encephalopathy associated with combined D-2- and L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria. The first patient presented in the neonatal period with hypotonia, irritability, uncontrollable seizures, poor eye contact, and poor feeding. He developed macrocephaly, hepatomegaly, and respiratory insufficiency requiring tracheostomy. Dysmorphic features included dolichocephaly, mild craniofacial dysmorphism, and clinodactyly of the fifth fingers. Brain imaging at age 3 months showed mild enlargement of lateral ventricles, several small germinal layer cysts over the head of the caudate nucleus, and delayed gyration and myelination. He had essentially no psychomotor development, and died at age 3.5 years. Laboratory studies showed increased urinary levels of D-2-HG, L-2-HG, and 2-oxoglutaric acid. The patient's younger sister was found to have mildly increased D-2-HG during prenatal testing; L-2-HG was normal. After birth, the girl showed a severe, rapidly deteriorating neonatal onset encephalopathy with intractable seizures, hypotonia, recurrent inspiratory stridor, and dyspnea, resulting in death at age 2.5 months. Extensive laboratory studies in this patient also showed increased 2-oxoglutaric acid and variably increased D-2-HG and L-2-HG in urine, plasma, and cerebrospinal fluid. Muntau et al. (2000) hypothesized that the variable levels of these organic acids in this patient reflected repeated testing at different ages. The third child showed a similar course, with neonatal encephalopathy, respiratory insufficiency, seizures, hypotonia, choreoathetotic and dystonic movements, microcephaly, cortical visual failure, and severe developmental delay. Brain MRI showed enlargement of lateral ventricles, delayed gyration, opercularization, and myelination, cysts over the caudate nucleus, and cerebellar hypoplasia. This patient died at the age of 8 months. Organic acid studies showed combined elevation of D-2-HG, L-2-HG, and 2-oxoglutaric acid. An older brother had died of unknown causes on the first day of life. |Nota et al. (2013) described a total of 12 patients from unrelated families of Arabic, European, or Latin American descent with combined D-2- and L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria. Eight of the patients were female, 4 were male. Eight of the patients had died at ages ranging from 1 month to 5 years 1 month. The oldest living patient was a 9-year-old female. All had developmental delay, hypotonia, and seizures. None of the patients had developed cancer. Patients had low to normal citrate and isocitrate with increases in D-2- and L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid. Malate and fumarate were elevated. Succinate was normal to twice the upper limit of normal. Alpha-ketoglutarate varied from one-fourth normal to 10 times normal range. SLC25A1 activity was 6.1 to 57% of control activity in the 7 patients in whom it was measured. |Edvardson et al. (2013) reported an 18-month-old girl, the third child of nonconsanguineous Ashkenazi Jewish parents, who was born at term of average size and at day 10 was admitted for poor sucking and apathy. She had marked hypotonia with erratic breathing and prolonged apnea, for which gastrostomy and tracheostomy were inserted. She made no developmental progress and developed generalized epilepsy by the age of 5 months which responded well to clonazepam. She had no spontaneous voluntary movements and eye contact was minimal. Ophthalmologic evaluation showed hypoplastic optic nerves. Weight and height were at the 3rd centile. Head circumference, initially on the 3rd centile, was -3 SD, consistent with acquired microcephaly. Urinary organic acids showed a large peak of 2-hydroxyglutaric acid and Krebs cycle intermediates. Brain MRI at 3 weeks showed complete agenesis of the corpus callosum but was otherwise normal. Chaouch et al. (2014) found that the patient with D2L2AD reported by Edvardson et al. (2013) had markedly increased jitter and blocking on EMG, consistent with myasthenic syndrome. Her symptoms did not fluctuate and did not improve with 3,4-DAP and ephedrine. Chaouch et al. (2014) noted that patients with D2L2AD have more significant neurologic deficits than patients with CMS23, and that CMS may not be detected. |
600721::D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria-1 (D2HGA1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the D-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase gene (D2HGDH; 609186) on chromosome 2q37.|D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria is a neurometabolic disorder first described by Chalmers et al. (1980). Clinical symptoms include developmental delay, epilepsy, hypotonia, and dysmorphic features. Mild and severe phenotypes were characterized (van der Knaap et al., 1999). The severe phenotype is homogeneous and is characterized by early infantile-onset epileptic encephalopathy and, often, cardiomyopathy. The mild phenotype has a more variable clinical presentation. |Genetic Heterogeneity of D-2-Hydroxyglutaric Aciduria|D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria-2 (D2HGA2; 613657) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the mitochondrial isocitrate dehydrogenase-2 gene (IDH2; 147650) on chromosome 15q26.|Nyhan et al. (1995) described 3 female patients, including 2 sibs, who were found to have excess accumulation of D-2-hydroxyglutaric acid in the urine. The phenotype was quite variable, even among the sibs, but included mental retardation, macrocephaly with cerebral atrophy, hypotonia, seizures, and involuntary movements. One of the patients developed severe intermittent vomiting and was given a pyloromyotomy. The electroencephalogram demonstrated hypsarrhythmia. There was an increased concentration of protein in cerebrospinal fluid, an unusual finding in inborn errors of metabolism. Increased CSF protein has also been observed in mitochondrial disorders, peroxisomal disorders, and Krabbe disease (245200). |Van der Knaap et al. (1999) reported clinical, biochemical, and neuroimaging data on 8 previously undescribed patients with D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria, 4 with the severe and 4 with the mild phenotype. The most frequent findings, regardless of the clinical phenotype, were epilepsy, hypotonia, and psychomotor retardation. Additional findings, mainly occurring in the severe phenotype, were episodic vomiting, cardiomyopathy, inspiratory stridor, and apneas. The most consistent MRI finding was enlargement of the lateral ventricles, occipital more than frontal. In both the severe and mild forms, MRI showed subependymal cysts and signs of delayed cerebral maturation. |Amiel et al. (1999) reported 2 unrelated cases with D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria presenting with epileptic encephalopathy. Both patients had minor facial anomalies, including a 'coarse' facial appearance, broad nasal bridge, and large protruding ears. The authors noted that minor facial anomalies had been observed in some reported cases of this condition. They suggested that D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria should be considered in patients with minor facial anomalies and epileptic encephalopathy of unknown origin. |Wajner et al. (2002) reported an infant with intermittent urinary excretion of D-2-hydroxyglutaric (D-2-OHG) acid who died at the age of 10 months from cardiogenic shock due to cardiomyopathy. High urinary concentrations of D-2-OHG acid and succinic acid, as well as increased levels of lactic acid, were detected on 3 different occasions, whereas a normal urinary profile of organic acids was found on 1 occasion. The clinical findings in this patient consisted of generalized hypotonia, irritability, developmental delay, generalized tonic seizures, lethargy, cardiomyopathy, and respiratory distress. Cerebral MRI revealed bilateral lesions in the substantia nigra, the periaqueductal area, the medial part of the thalamus, the hypothalamus, the caudate nucleus, putamen, and globus pallidus. This pattern is suggestive of a mitochondrial disorder. However, respiratory chain enzyme activities were normal in fibroblasts. Exogenous supplementation of D-2-OHG acid strongly inhibited cytochrome-c oxidase activity in fibroblasts from the patient and from normal controls in vitro. Wajner et al. (2002) concluded that their patient had an unusual form of D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria and that the increase of lactic acid and some citric acid cycle intermediates encountered in some patients with D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria may be due to a functional defect of the respiratory chain directly caused by the accumulation of the D-2-OHG acid.|Clarke et al. (2003) reported a girl with an intermediate form of D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria. In the neonatal period, she showed respiratory insufficiency, increased sleepiness, and poor feeding. Physical features included turricephaly, brachycephaly, broad, flat face with coarse features, including a short upturned nose, broad nasal tip, thick alae nasi, small nostrils, and a prominent jaw. Her ears were low set, cupped, and simple in structure, and the earlobes were anteverted. At 3 months of age, she developed grand mal and complex partial seizures. EEG showed abundant epileptiform activity, and brain imaging showed mild enlargement of the ventricles. Urinary D-2-hydroxyglutarate was markedly increased. At age 31 months, she showed significant global developmental delay, cortical visual impairment, microcephaly, and mild hypotonia. Clarke et al. (2003) noted that the physical features were similar to those of the patients reported by Amiel et al. (1999). |Struys et al. (2005) reported 3 individuals from 2 unrelated consanguineous Palestinian families with mild forms of D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria. In 1 family, 2 sibs were asymptomatic and showed normal development at ages 10 and 3 years, respectively. In the second family, the child developed absence seizures with myoclonic jerks at age 8 years, showed difficulty in reading, hyperactivity, and behavioral problems, but had normal gross and fine motor development. IQ was assessed as 75. |Misra et al. (2005) reported 4.5-year-old monozygotic twin sisters, born of nonconsanguineous African American parents, with D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria confirmed by genetic analysis (609186.0005; 609186.0006). The girls had markedly different phenotypes. The more severely affected girl had multiple congenital anomalies, hypotonia, severe developmental delay, epileptic encephalopathy, ventriculomegaly, and cortical atrophy with periventricular leukomalacia. In contrast, her sister had a normal neurocognitive and neuroradiologic phenotype without congenital abnormalities. Both girls had similar dysmorphic facies, with dolichocephaly, malar flattening, and broad nasal root, and both had similar biochemical profiles. The discordant phenotype indicated that epigenetic differences or environmental factors must have influenced the phenotypic response to the biochemical defect, rather than allelic heterogeneity. |D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria has been described in association with spondyloenchondromatosis (614875), a rare skeletal dysplasia that presents with multiple enchondromata in the metaphyses of the long bones associated with dysplastic vertebral bodies (Honey et al., 2003; Talkhani et al., 2000; Bayar et al., 2005). |
261515::D-bifunctional protein deficiency can be caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the HSD17B4 gene (601860) on chromosome 5q2, which encodes the D-bifunctional protein (DBP).|D-bifunctional protein deficiency is a disorder of peroxisomal fatty acid beta-oxidation. See also peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency (264470), caused by mutation in the ACOX1 gene (609751) on chromosome 17q25. The clinical manifestations of these 2 deficiencies are similar to those of disorders of peroxisomal assembly, including X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD; 300100), Zellweger cerebrohepatorenal syndrome (see 214100) and neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD; see 601539) (Watkins et al., 1995). |DBP deficiency has been classified into 3 subtypes depending upon the deficient enzyme activity. Type I is a deficiency of both 2-enoyl-CoA hydratase and 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase; type II is a deficiency of hydratase activity alone; and type III is a deficiency of dehydrogenase activity alone. Virtually all patients with types I, II, and III have a severe phenotype characterized by infantile-onset of hypotonia, seizures, and abnormal facial features, and most die before age 2 years. McMillan et al. (2012) proposed a type IV deficiency on the basis of less severe features; these patients have a phenotype reminiscent of Perrault syndrome (PRLTS1; 233400). Pierce et al. (2010) noted that Perrault syndrome and DBP deficiency overlap clinically and suggested that DBP deficiency may be underdiagnosed. |Watkins et al. (1989) reported a black male infant with neonatal hypotonia and macrocephaly who developed seizures and required ventilatory support for the first 4 days of life. By 6 weeks of age, he had made no developmental progress, seizures continued, and the fontanels were large. Brain biopsy at 6 weeks of age showed polymicrogyria. He also had generalized osteopenia with delayed bone maturation. He died at 5.5 months as a result of an acute necrotizing enterocolitis. Postmortem examination showed small adrenal glands with a normal medulla and replacement of the entire cortex with a single type of lipid-containing 'balloon' cell. The changes were identical to those of seen in X-linked and autosomal recessive neonatal forms of adrenoleukodystrophy. Very long-chain fatty acids were increased in the patient's plasma and fibroblasts, and beta-oxidation was impaired. However, biochemical analysis distinguished the disorder from the other forms of ALD: cultured fibroblasts had normal levels of serum phytanic acid and L-pipecolic acid and normal plasmalogen synthesis. In addition, electron microscopy and catalase subcellular distribution studies showed that peroxisomes were present in the patient's tissues. Immunoblot studies of peroxisomal beta-oxidation enzymes showed deficiency of the L-bifunctional enzyme (LBP; enoyl-CoA hydratase/3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase; 607037), whereas acyl-CoA oxidase and the mature form of peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase (ACAA1; 604054) were present. |Wanders et al. (1990, 1992) also described peroxisomal bifunctional enzyme deficiency, which was associated with a more severe phenotype than that of peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency. Wanders et al. (1992) used complementation analysis to identify the primary defect as residing in the bifunctional enzyme. The patient presented by Watkins et al. (1989) lacked the L-bifunctional enzyme protein, whereas the patient reported by Wanders et al. (1990) had an inactive form of the enzyme. |Using complementation analysis, Suzuki et al. (1994) identified 2 unrelated Japanese girls with presumed L-bifunctional protein deficiency. One child showed profound hypotonia, feeding difficulty, and intractable convulsions soon after delivery. Craniofacial dysmorphism included large fontanel, frontal bossing, low nasal bridge and upward-slanting of palpebral fissures. Other features included hepatomegaly with normal transaminases and bilirubin, funnel chest, talipes equinovarus, and calcific stippling of the patella. She suffered a subdural hematoma due to vitamin K deficiency on the forty-ninth postnatal day and died of pneumonia at 12 months of age (Nakada et al., 1993). The second child, born of consanguineous parents, showed scaphocephaly, frontal bossing, micrognathia, high-arched palate, delayed closure of the anterior fontanel, and calcific stippling at the shoulder and knee joints. She could smile and follow a person at 3 months of age, but regressed thereafter. She manifested adrenocortical insufficiency from the age of 11 months and died of airway obstruction at 21 months of age. |Goldfischer et al. (1986) described an infant, 11 months old at the time of her sudden death, who showed clinical, biochemical, and pathologic features similar in many respects to those seen in the Zellweger syndrome. She had increased serum levels of very long chain fatty acids, an accumulation of trihydroxycoprostanoic acid in duodenal aspirate, and slightly increased levels of pipecolic acid concentrations in serum and urine. However, liver biopsy showed an abundance of peroxisomes, which are profoundly deficient in Zellweger syndrome. Furthermore, the activity of the peroxisomal enzyme acyl-CoA:dihydroxyacetone-phosphate acyltransferase was normal in the patient; this membrane-associated enzyme is deficient in Zellweger syndrome. Peroxisomal oxidation of palmitoyl-CoA was reduced about 15% of the control values, suggesting a defect in peroxisomal beta-oxidation. In this patient, Schram et al. (1987) found deficiency of peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase in postmortem liver. Clayton et al. (1990) demonstrated that unconjugated varanic acid (3-alpha,7-alpha,12-alpha,24-tetrahydroxycholestanoic acid), an intermediate in the formation of cholic acid from THCA (3-alpha,7-alpha,12-alpha-trihydroxycholestanoic acid), was present in the body fluids of the patient reported by Goldfischer et al. (1986). In a reinvestigation of the patient reported by Goldfischer et al. (1986), Ferdinandusse et al. (2002) found absence of the D-bifunctional protein postmortem brain, whereas thiolase was normally present. In this patient, Ferdinandusse et al. (2002) identified a homozygous mutation in the HSD17B4 gene (601860.0006), confirming a diagnosis of D-bifunctional protein deficiency. There was no longer evidence for the existence of thiolase deficiency as a distinct clinical entity. |Van Grunsven et al. (1998) reported a boy with D-bifunctional protein deficiency confirmed by the demonstration of a homozygous mutation in the HSD17B4 gene (601860.0003). The boy was born of nonconsanguineous Caucasian parents at 36 weeks' gestation after an uncomplicated pregnancy. Head circumference was at the 50th percentile at birth, but macrocephaly developed during the first year of life. Examination showed high forehead with frontal bossing, low-set ears, and a large fontanel. The liver was palpable 2.5 cm below the costal margin. Other features included a long, small thorax, hypospadias, limb-girdle muscle wasting, and generalized hypotonia. Neurologic examination showed negative traction and Moro response, with maximal headlag at 4 weeks. At the age of 2 months, the patient became cyanotic and developed epileptic seizures leading to aspiration. MRI of the brain showed white matter abnormalities consistent with dysmyelination. The patient died at the age of 16 months from aspiration pneumonia. Laboratory studies showed increased plasma very long-chain fatty acids increased levels of several bile acid intermediates, and normal levels of plasmalogen. The 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity of the D-bifunctional protein was completely inactive, whereas the enoyl-CoA hydratase component was active. |Nakano et al. (2001) reported a patient with D-bifunctional protein deficiency who was compound heterozygous for 2 mutations in the HSD17B4 gene (601860.0001 and 601860.0005). Polyhydramnios and fetal ascites were detected at 30 weeks' gestation. At birth, the child had claw hands, hammertoes, abdominal distention, generalized hypotonia, and craniofacial dysmorphism with frontal bossing, low nasal bridge, and large fontanel. Chylous ascites was aspirated on the eighth day of life. Postnatally she developed psychomotor retardation. She died of pneumonia and heart failure at 7 months of age. Autopsy showed polymicrogyria of the cerebrum and cerebellum, a single neuron heterotopia in the white matter, hypoplastic corpus callosum, excessive convolutions of the inferior olivary nucleus, fibrosis around the Glisson capsule in the liver, renal cortical microcysts involving the Bowman capsule, and lamellar inclusions in the adrenal cortex. |Ferdinandusse et al. (2006) reported the clinical features of 126 patients with D-bifunctional protein deficiency. Some of the patients had been previously reported. Most patients presented with neonatal hypotonia and seizures. Other common features included visual impairment, severe psychomotor retardation, and a characteristic facies with high forehead, high-arched palate, enlarged fontanel, long philtrum, epicanthal folds, hypertelorism, macrocephaly, retrognathia, and low-set ears. Brain imaging showed gross ventricular dilatation (29%), neocortical dysplasia (27%), cerebral demyelination (17%), and cerebellar atrophy (17%). Liver disease was present in 26% of patients and 43% had hepatomegaly. Postmortem examination of 11 patients showed polymicrogyria in 64%. Renal cysts and adrenal cortex atrophy were seen in 33% and 42% of autopsied cases, respectively, and uncommon features included delay of bone maturation, skeletal malformations, and calcific stippling. Although most patients died before age 2 years, 12 patients survived beyond 2 years, 5 of whom survived beyond 7.5 years. Biochemical analysis showed a clear correlation between peroxisomal beta-oxidation activity and survival. |
605899::mutations in several genes in the mitochondrial glycine cleavage system have been found to cause glycine encephalopathy (GCE), also known as nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH). These include the genes encoding P protein (GLDC; 238300), T protein (AMT; 238310), and, in 1 patient, the H protein (GCSH; 238330). Most patients with GCE have a defect in the GLDC gene.|Classic Neonatal Form|Most patients with GCE have the neonatal phenotype, presenting in the first few days of life with lethargy, hypotonia, and myoclonic jerks, and progressing to apnea, and often to death. Those who regain spontaneous respiration develop intractable seizures and profound mental retardation. In the infantile form of GCE, patients present with seizures and have various degrees of mental retardation after a symptom-free interval and seemingly normal development for up to 6 months. In the mild-episodic form, patients present in childhood with mild mental retardation and episodes of delirium, chorea, and vertical gaze palsy during febrile illness. In the late-onset form, patients present in childhood with progressive spastic diplegia and optic atrophy, but intellectual function is preserved and seizures have not been reported (Hamosh and Johnston, 2001). See review by Tada and Hayasaka (1987). |Unlike glycinemia with ketoacidosis and leukopenia, also known as propionic acidemia (606054), episodic ketoacidosis with vomiting, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia does not occur in nonketotic hyperglycinemia. Glycine is the only amino acid elevated in serum and urine and the only amino acid harmful to these patients. Some have died in the newborn period after a course characterized by lethargy, weak cry, generalized hypotonia, absent reflexes, and periodic myoclonic jerks (Balfe et al., 1965). The few who attain an older age show severe mental retardation (Mabry and Karam, 1963; Gerritsen et al., 1965). |Hayasaka et al. (1983) studied the glycine cleavage system in the liver and brain obtained at autopsy in 2 male infants with the typical form of nonketotic hyperglycinemia. In one a defect in the P protein was found; in the second, T protein was defective. The infant with the P protein defect was born of unrelated parents, was lethargic with a poor suck from birth, developed marked hypotonia, intermittent apnea, and poor responsiveness to stimuli, had mildly elevated blood ammonia and markedly elevated glycine in blood and cerebrospinal fluid, and died at age 12 days. Immunochemical analysis indicated absence of the enzyme P protein itself. The second infant appeared well at birth and nursed well the first day. He was hospitalized on the third day with 'lethargy, bordering on coma.' Despite ventilatory support, 7 exchange transfusions to lower blood glycine, and treatment with sodium benzoate and strychnine, he died on the twentieth day. T protein was undetectable in the brain and extremely low in liver. Autopsy in the first case, with P protein deficiency, showed absence of the corpus callosum and spinal cord hydromelia. The authors stated that they had seen a similar structural defect with deficiency of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (see 312170). |Schutgens et al. (1986) reported a case with T protein deficiency. |Cataltepe et al. (2000) reported 4 patients with nonketotic hyperglycinemia who developed pulmonary hypertension. Two patients had classic neonatal GCE and developed pulmonary hypertension in the newborn period; both died from pulmonary hypertension. The other 2 patients were sibs from Bangladesh with atypical GCE, the first of whom presented with pulmonary hypertension at the age of 6. His brother had documented pulmonary at the age of 4 years, which resolved spontaneously and then recurred in association with thiamine deficiency when he was 21 years old. |Van Hove et al. (2000) reported 4 patients with typical neonatal-onset NKH who developed hydrocephalus requiring shunting in early infancy. Brain imaging revealed acute hydrocephalus, a megacisterna magna or posterior fossa cyst, pronounced atrophy of the white matter, and an extremely thin corpus callosum in all. The 3 older patients had profound developmental disabilities. Van Hove et al. (2000) concluded that the development of hydrocephalus in NKH is an additional poor prognostic sign. |In cells derived from a deceased boy, born of unrelated Serbian parents, with GCE, Swanson et al. (2017) identified a homozygous missense mutation in the AMT gene (S117L; 238310.0009). In vitro functional expression studies showed that the mutant AMT protein was unstable and had only 9% residual enzymatic activity compared to controls. The patient was unusual because he had originally been reported as having D-glyceric aciduria (220120) caused by a homozygous frameshift mutation in the GLYCTK gene (610516.0001) (Brandt et al., 1974; Sass et al., 2010). Increased glycine in the patient had been thought to be secondary to the GLYCTK defect; however, the molecular findings confirmed that the patient had the unusual cooccurrence of 2 inborn errors of metabolism. Swanson et al. (2017) concluded that D-glyceric aciduria does not cause deficient glycine cleavage enzyme activity or nonketotic hyperglycinemia. |Atypical Mild Form|Unlike the classic neonatal form of the disorder, atypical or mild glycine encephalopathy is phenotypically heterogeneous and nonspecific, making diagnosis difficult (Flusser et al., 2005). |Cole and Meek (1985) emphasized the occurrence of an expressive speech deficit and neurologic abnormalities during intercurrent infections as striking features of the milder form of the disease. The cases of Ando et al. (1978), Frazier et al. (1978), and Flannery et al. (1983) also fall into this category. Hayasaka et al. (1987) cited one patient with atypical GCE and features of progressive degeneration of the central nervous system. |Dinopoulos et al. (2005) reported 3 unrelated adults with a mild form of glycine encephalopathy confirmed by genetic analysis (238300.0008; 238300.0009). All 3 patients showed hypotonia as infants and had developmental delay. One patient showed appendicular ataxia and choreoathetoid movements at age 4 years. Between ages 5 and 12 years, he had frequent outbursts of aggressiveness. He attended special education classes and graduated from high school. The second patient was hypotonic at birth and developed seizures during the first week of life. Aggressive behavior was noted at age 12 years; he was fully dependent on his family. The third patient developed hypotonia at age 6 months. He was diagnosed with attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and had outbursts of aggression and impulsivity. Treatment with dextromethorphan was ineffective. He graduated from school in special education classes. Biochemical analysis showed residual GLDC activity ranging from 6 to 8%, which Dinopoulos et al. (2005) suggested may explain the milder clinical phenotype. The authors emphasized the clinical heterogeneity of the mild form of GCE. |Flusser et al. (2005) reported a large consanguineous Israeli Bedouin kindred in which 9 members had atypical GCE confirmed by genetic analysis (238300.0010). Most patients presented during the first months of life with abnormal movements, including mild to moderate generalized hypotonia, lateral head nodding, choreoathetoid hand movements, and pill rolling. Seven patients had seizures with generalized spike and slow wave abnormalities in EEG; 2 had infantile spasms with hypsarrhythmia. All had delayed motor development, moderate mental retardation, and limited expressive language. The patients also showed irritability and restlessness as infants and later showed aggressive and destructive behavior. Treatment was ineffective. |Yu et al. (2013) described 3 children from a consanguineous family who had autism spectrum disorder and who carried a homozygous mutation in the AMT gene. While individually nondiagnostic, the 3 affected children exhibited a range of neurologic symptoms that in aggregate were strongly suggestive of NKH. The eldest child was 12 years of age and had, in addition to a diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder, a history of severe epilepsy, with first seizures presenting at 10 months of age. The second child was 9 years of age and suffered from autism and epilepsy, but her seizures were milder. The third child was 2 years of age and had language and motor delays and carried a diagnosis of pervasive developmental disorder (PDD), but had had only 1 febrile seizure. Direct biochemical analysis of the mutation (ile308 to phe, I308F) demonstrated reduced activity. When compared to classical NKH-associated values, glycine cleavage activity of the mutated allele was at the mild end of the range of reported values, suggesting that the affected children in this family suffered from undiagnosed atypical NKH presenting as autism spectrum disorder and seizures. Plasma amino acid screening was normal in the 2 older children, a result that is typically seen in milder forms of NKH. |Transient Neonatal Hyperglycinemia|Transient neonatal hyperglycinemia (TNH) is characterized by elevated plasma and CSF glycine levels at birth that are normalized within 2 to 8 weeks. TNH is clinically and biochemically indistinguishable from typical nonketotic hyperglycinemia at onset. Applegarth and Toone (2001) reviewed 7 cases of transient NKH. |Korman et al. (2004) reported 3 sibs from a consanguineous Muslim Palestinian family who had an unusual NKH phenotype. All 3 sibs were diagnosed with NKH within the first 3 days of life with characteristic elevated CSF and plasma glycine levels and elevated CSF-to-plasma glycine ratios. However, none of them developed neurologic symptoms, and all showed appropriate development, including good school performance in the 2 children of school age. The 2 older children showed persistent hyperglycinemia. A patient from a second unrelated family diagnosed with NKH had mild neurologic sequelae. In all 4 patients, Korman et al. (2004) identified a homozygous mutation in the GLDC gene (238300.0006), which was shown to retain 32% residual enzyme activity in vitro. The authors suggested that these patients exhibited a new phenotype of NKH. |
245450::Duran et al. (1977) described a single child of Sicilian descent who had mental retardation, microcephaly, antimongoloid slanting of the eyes, aniridia, and bilateral inguinal hernia. Levels of lactic acid were normal in the plasma, but were high in the urine. The lactic acid was shown to be D-lactic acid. The lactic acid normally produced is L-lactic acid and only when it becomes elevated in the plasma does it 'overflow' into the urine. The authors posited that their patient had an inborn error of metabolism that leads to production of D-lactate and that lactate with this configuration is not resorbed by the renal tubule. |
220500::deafness, onychodystrophy, osteodystrophy, mental retardation, and seizures syndrome (DOORS) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the TBC1D24 gene (613577) on chromosome 16p13.|The DOOR syndrome is an acronym for deafness, onychodystrophy, osteodystrophy, and mental retardation. Cantwell (1975) suggested this designation for the disorder, which can also include triphalangeal thumbs, seizures, and abnormal dermatoglyphics. Inheritance is autosomal recessive.|See also DDOD syndrome (124480), which shows autosomal dominant inheritance of congenital deafness and onychodystrophy without mental retardation.|Walbaum et al. (1970) described a brother and sister with mental retardation, perceptive deafness, dysplasia of the fingernails, triphalangeal thumbs, hypoplasia of the terminal phalanges, and 'decapsalidic' fingerprints, i.e., an arch pattern on each finger. The patient reported by Qazi and Smithwick (1970) may have had the same disorder. |Eronen et al. (1985) reported a constellation of features in a male infant who had 2 double first cousins, females, who had died with the same disorder. The patients had absence of the distal phalanges and nails of all 10 digits, cystic dysplasia of the kidneys, and dilated right cerebral ventricle. The 2 cousins died at age 2 years and 2 hours, respectively. The proband and the older surviving cousin had convulsions. Le Merrer et al. (1992) described this syndrome in 2 unrelated children. Absence or hypoplasia of the distal phalanges of the toes and fingers was a particularly striking feature. Expression of the renal and cerebral manifestations was variable. One patient had seizures with abnormal EEG and a double kidney with 2 ureters and 2 renal arteries; he died at the age of 6 months. Both patients showed a large nose with wide nasal tip. |Lin et al. (1993) reported what they considered to be the seventeenth case of the recessive form of the DOOR syndrome. The parents were not known to be consanguineous. The patient had developmental delay, severe sensorineural deafness, and abnormal nails and phalanges in the hands and feet. Urinary 2-oxoglutarate excretion was normal. There were no seizures in infancy. |Rajab et al. (2000) reported an additional 4 cases of DOOR syndrome in 2 related sibships from an extended Omani family. The children had deafness, onychodystrophy, osteodystrophy, microcephaly, and global developmental retardation with progressive blindness. Seizures, which were associated with hypsarrhythmia, were frequent and difficult to control and ultimately were the cause of death in 2 patients. An MRI of the brain in 1 patient showed a number of abnormalities including markedly reduced myelination. The urine organic acid analysis showed a 10-fold increase of 2-oxoglutarate. In 1 patient the placenta was noted to have multiple fluid-filled cysts. Rajab et al. (2000) suggested that there may be genetic heterogeneity in the autosomal recessive form of this syndrome, and that the presence of increased 2-oxoglutarate is associated with a more severe phenotype, which is frequently lethal. |Surendran et al. (2002) studied the activity of 2-oxoglutarate decarboxylase in the fibroblasts and white blood cells of 4 patients with autosomal recessive DOOR syndrome and found significantly lower levels as compared to controls. |Felix et al. (2002) reported 3 cases of DOOR syndrome in unrelated Brazilian children. One of the cases also had a congenital cardiac defect. None had organic acid abnormalities. |James et al. (2007) reported an infant girl with features of DOOR syndrome, including sensorineural deafness, distal phalangeal hypoplasia of the hands and feet, hypoplastic nails, and increased urinary 2-oxoglutaric acid and 2-hydroxyglutaric acid. She had coarse facial features with high forehead, mild hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, broad nasal bridge with prominent nasal tip and nares, long philtrum, and large mouth. She had poor feeding, recurrent respiratory infections, and died at age 10 months. |In a literature review, James et al. (2007) identified 32 patients with DOOR syndrome compiled from 18 publications. Universal features included profound deafness, usually from infancy, malformations of the nails and digits, and mental retardation. Most patients had coarse facial features with broad nasal bridge, anteverted nares, everted lower lip, and high-arched palate. Ophthalmologic anomalies were reported in 43% of patients, including optic atrophy and blindness, high myopia, and iris hypoplasia. Other neurologic abnormalities included neonatal hypotonia, seizures, and peripheral neuropathy. Less common findings included dental, renal, and cardiac anomalies. The disorder follows a progressive course and 32% die in early childhood from seizures or respiratory distress. James et al. (2007) postulated a neurometabolic etiology. |Mihci et al. (2008) reported DOOR syndrome in a patient born after conception with intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Her dizygotic twin was unaffected and healthy. The affected girl demonstrated speech delay, classic facial features of DOOR syndrome, and malformations of the nails and digits. She did not have organic acid abnormalities and showed only mild neurologic involvement. |Campeau et al. (2014) reported 11 patients from 9 unrelated families with DOORS syndrome. All patients had the 5 classic features of the disorder, including developmental delay and intellectual disability, deafness, abnormal fingers with short terminal phalanges, abnormal fingernails, and seizures. All but one had abnormal toes and toenails, and 3 had triphalangeal thumbs. Seizure types were variable and included generalized tonic-clonic, complex partial, focal clonic, and infantile spasms. Six patients had increased urinary 2-oxoglutaric acid. |
167320::inclusion body myopathy with Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD1) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the VCP gene (601023) on chromosome 9p13.|See also amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-14 with or without frontotemporal dementia (ALS14; 613954), which is also caused by heterozygous mutation in the VCP gene and can show overlapping clinical features.|IBMPFD is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by incomplete penetrance of 3 main features: disabling muscle weakness (in 90%), osteolytic bone lesions consistent with Paget disease (in 51%), and frontotemporal dementia (in 32%). Muscle weakness is an isolated symptom in about 30% of patients and the presenting symptom in greater than half of patients, suggesting that IBMPFD may commonly be seen in a neuromuscular clinic without its other syndromic features (review by Weihl et al., 2009). |IBMPFD2 (MSP2; 615422) is caused by mutation in the HNRNPA2B1 gene (600124) on chromosome 7p15. IBMPFD3 (MSP3; 615424) is caused by mutation in the HNRNPA1 gene (164017) on chromosome 12q13.|Bucelli et al. (2015) suggested use of the designation MSP4 to include disparate phenotypes in muscle, brain, spinal cord, and bone caused by mutation in the SQSTM1 gene (601530); see 617158.|Tucker et al. (1982) studied a large kindred with a syndrome of lower motor neuron degeneration and polyostotic skeletal disorganization resembling Paget disease of bone (PDB; see 167250). The disorder begins insidiously at about age 35 with weakness and atrophy of the leg and proximal arm muscles. Nerve conductions are normal; EMG shows muscle denervation, as does muscle biopsy. The disorder progresses to wheelchair confinement and later to bed confinement, quadriparesis, dementia, respiratory failure, and death before age 60 years. Even early in the neurologic illness, patients have coarse trabeculation, cortical thickening, and spotty sclerosis on bone x-rays; diffusely increased uptake of radionuclide and elevated heat-labile serum alkaline phosphatase. The disorder affected 6 females and 6 males in 5 sibships of 3 generations with no instance of male-to-male transmission. |Kimonis et al. (2000) described a family in which autosomal dominant limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) was associated with early-onset Paget disease of bone PDB and cardiomyopathy. Eight of 11 affected individuals had both disorders. Onset of PDB occurred at a mean age of 35 years, with classic distribution involving the spine, pelvis, and skull. Muscle weakness and atrophy was progressive with mildly elevated to normal CPK levels. Muscle biopsy in the oldest male revealed vacuolated fibers, but in others revealed nonspecific myopathy. Affected individuals die from progressive muscle weakness and respiratory and cardiac failure in their forties to sixties. |Kovach et al. (2001) described the clinical, biochemical, radiologic, and pathologic characteristics of 49 affected individuals from the family described by Kimonis et al. (2000) and 3 other unrelated families with autosomal dominant inclusion body myopathy (IBM), PDB, and frontotemporal dementia. Ninety percent of the patients had myopathy, 43% had PDB, and 37% had premature frontotemporal dementia. |Watts et al. (2004) reported 13 families with IBMPFD, 12 from the U.S. and 1 from Canada. Among those individuals, 82% of affected individuals had myopathy, 49% had PDB, and 30% had early-onset frontotemporal dementia. The mean age at presentation was 42 years for both IBM and PDB, whereas frontotemporal dementia typically presented at age 53 years. In IBMPFD myopathic muscle and PDB osteoclasts, inclusions appear similar, suggestive of disruptions in the same pathologic pathway. Family 11 in the report by Watts et al. (2004) was originally reported by Tucker et al. (1982) (Kimonis, 2005). |Haubenberger et al. (2005) reported an Austrian family in which 4 sibs had autosomal dominant inclusion body myopathy and Paget disease associated with a heterozygous mutation in the VCP gene (R159H; 601023.0007). None of the affected individuals developed frontotemporal dementia even though all were over 60 years of age. Haubenberger et al. (2005) noted that only approximately 30% of patients with VCP mutations develop dementia, illustrating phenotypic variability. In a follow-up of this family, van der Zee et al. (2009) noted that 1 patient had developed dementia at age 64. Van der Zee et al. (2009) also identified the R159H mutation in affected members of 2 unrelated Belgian families. In 1 family, patients presented with frontotemporal lobar degeneration only, whereas in the other family, patients developed frontotemporal lobar degeneration, Paget disease of the bone, or both without signs of inclusion body myopathy for any of the mutation carriers. Haplotype analysis showed that the 2 families and the Austrian family reported by Haubenberger et al. (2005) were unrelated. Autopsy data of 3 patients from the 2 Belgian families showed frontotemporal lobar degeneration with numerous ubiquitin-immunoreactive, intranuclear inclusions and dystrophic neurites staining positive for TDP43 (TARDBP; 605078) protein. Van der Zee et al. (2009) commented on the high degree of clinical heterogeneity and incomplete penetrance of the disorder in different families carrying the same mutation. |Kimonis et al. (2008) reported detailed clinical features of 49 patients from 9 families with IBMPFD confirmed by genetic analysis. One family had been previously reported by Tucker et al. (1982). Forty-two (86%) patients had muscle disease, the majority of whom were initially misdiagnosed as having some other form of muscular dystrophy or spinal muscular atrophy. Weakness was distal and/or proximal, and many patients were confined to wheelchairs. Muscle biopsies showed inclusion bodies and/or rimmed vacuoles (39%) or nonspecific changes. Frontotemporal dementia was diagnosed in 13 (27%) of 49 individuals at a mean age of 57 years, of whom 3 had been originally diagnosed with Alzheimer disease (104300). Paget disease of bone was found in 28 (57%) of 49 patients at a mean age of 40 years and correlated with increased serum alkaline phosphatase. Kimonis et al. (2008) postulated that IBMPFD is underdiagnosed among patients with myopathy and/or dementia. |Viassolo et al. (2008) reported an Italian family in which 2 sibs and their mother had IBMPFD. All 3 had progressive inclusion body myopathy and rapidly progressive severe dementia, but only 1 developed Paget disease. Genetic analysis identified a heterozygous mutation in the VCP gene (R155H; 601023.0001). Several other family members were reportedly affected. Viassolo et al. (2008) discussed the implications of the incomplete penetrance of some of the features for genetic counseling. |Kim et al. (2011) reported 3 Korean sibs with IBMPFD confirmed by genetic analysis (601023.0002). The proband developed progressive dementia presenting as fluent aphasia and language difficulties with onset at age 47. She never developed myopathy, but did develop asymptomatic Paget disease with increased serum alkaline phosphatase and lytic bone lesions on imaging. Her brother developed slowly progressive proximal muscle weakness at age 50, followed by frontotemporal dementia characterized initially by comprehension defects at age 54. He never had Paget disease, although serum alkaline phosphatase was increased. A second brother developed muscle weakness at age 47, followed by Paget disease at age 53, and dementia at age 61. Brain MRI in all patients showed asymmetric atrophy in the anterior inferior and lateral temporal lobes and inferior parietal lobule with ventricular dilatation on the affected side (2 on the left, 1 on the right). Two had glucose hypometabolism in the lateral temporal and inferior parietal areas, with less involvement of the anterior temporal and frontal lobes compared to those with typical semantic dementia. |Sacconi et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated men in their fifties who presented with a phenotype reminiscent of FSHD1 (158900) but were found to carry a heterozygous VCP mutation (R191Q; 601023.0006). One had scapuloperoneal weakness without facial involvement and increased serum creatine kinase. The second patient had facial weakness, shoulder and pelvic girdle weakness, and anterior foreleg weakness. Creatine kinase was increased 4-fold. Muscle biopsies of both patients showed mild dystrophic changes, but no inclusion bodies. Both had a myopathic pattern on EMG. One was later found to have a mild dysexecutive syndrome, but neither had evidence of Paget disease. |Schroder et al. (2005) reported a patient with frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and inclusion body myopathy caused by mutation in the VCP gene (601023.0002). There was no evidence of Paget disease. Neuropathologic examination showed cortical atrophy and widespread neuronal loss; subcortical neuronal loss was less severe. The cerebral and cerebellar white matter had severe astrogliosis. Surviving cortical pyramidal neurons contained VCP- and ubiquitin (see 191321)-positive intranuclear inclusions and displayed cytoplasmic autofluorescence consistent with lipofuscin. Nuclear inclusions were not seen in astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, or microglial cells. Western blot analysis showed a single 97-kD band corresponding to normal-sized VCP that was similar to control brains. Schroder et al. (2005) concluded that mutant VCP causes a novel form of frontotemporal dementia, distinct from tau (MAPT; 157140)-associated FTD (see 600274), characterized by neuronal nuclear inclusions containing ubiquitin and VCP. The authors suggested that mutant VCP interferes with ubiquitin-dependent pathways, leading to abnormal intracellular and intranuclear protein aggregation. |
614371::variation in several different genes likely influences susceptibility and resistance to dengue virus, as well as disease progression and severity.A promoter polymorphism in the CD209 gene (604672) is associated with protection from dengue fever, but not dengue hemorrhagic fever.|Dengue virus is a flavivirus belonging to the family Flaviviridae. Its principal vector is Aedes aegypti, a highly urbanized, daytime-biting mosquito that breeds in stored water. There are 4 antigenetically variant serotypes of dengue virus, DEN-1 to DEN-4, and type-specific immunity against one serotype cannot block infection with another serotype. Disease manifestations following dengue infection range from subclinical infection to severe and fatal disease, with age, gender, genotype, immunologic status, and flavivirus infection history of the host all influencing disease severity. Primary infection is mainly associated with dengue fever (DF). Symptoms of DF typically appear 4 to 7 days after the mosquito bite and include high fever, headache, retroocular pain, conjunctival changes, and facial flushing. Although primary dengue infections are mostly recovered, a secondary infection with a different serotype of the virus leads to the complex condition of dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) with plasma leakage and thrombocytopenia or a more fatal condition, dengue shock syndrome (DSS). High fever, hemorrhagic phenomenon, hepatomegaly, and circulatory failure are mainly associated with DHF. Hemorrhages in DHF are seen in skin, subcutaneous tissues, heart, liver, and gastrointestinal tract. An estimated 50 to 100 million illnesses due to dengue infection occur annually, including 250,000 to 500,000 cases of DHF and 24,000 deaths. About 2.5 billion people are estimated to be at risk, particularly those living in tropical and subtropical areas of Asia and Latin America (reviews by Faheem et al. (2011), Whitehorn and Simmons (2011), and Guzman et al. (2010)).|
602398::desmosterolosis is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the DHCR24 gene (606418) on chromosome 1p32.|Desmosterolosis is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by multiple congenital anomalies and elevated levels of the cholesterol precursor desmosterol in plasma, tissue, and cultured cells (summary by Waterham et al., 2001). |FitzPatrick et al. (1998) reported the case of an infant with multiple lethal congenital malformations and osteosclerosis in whom there was generalized accumulation of an abnormal neutral sterol and a relative deficiency of cholesterol. The sterol was identified by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) as desmosterol, a biosynthetic precursor of cholesterol. The infant had macrocephaly, hypoplastic nasal bridge, thick alveolar ridges, gingival nodules, cleft palate, total anomalous pulmonary venous drainage, ambiguous genitalia, short limbs, and generalized osteosclerosis. FitzPatrick et al. (1998) compared the phenotype to that of Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (270400), which is a defect in the synthesis of cholesterol, and Raine syndrome (259775), which is characterized by generalized osteosclerosis, nasal hypoplasia, and gingival nodules. The abnormal accumulations of desmosterol occurred in the kidney, liver, and brain. Higher than normal levels of the same sterol were detected in plasma samples obtained from both parents. The biochemical phenotype was highly suggestive of a novel inborn error of cholesterol biosynthesis caused by an autosomal recessive deficiency of 3-beta-hydroxysterol-delta-24-reductase. Because of the phenotypic overlap with Raine syndrome, postmortem tissue samples from the patient with Raine syndrome described by Kan and Kozlowski (1992) were analyzed; however, desmosterol accumulation was not found in the tissues of that case, suggesting that it represented a distinct disorder. FitzPatrick et al. (1998) stated that there are 2 general mechanisms by which aberrant cholesterol synthesis may cause malformations: a relative deficiency of cholesterol and a relative excess of sterol precursor. These are not mutually exclusive. Furthermore, the hedgehog family of proteins, mutations in which have been identified in malformations (e.g., SHH; 600725), have been shown to undergo posttranslational modification by covalent attachment of a cholesterol molecule to the biologically active N-terminal fragment of these peptides (Porter et al., 1996). |Zolotushko et al. (2011) reported a consanguineous Bedouin kindred in which 6 individuals had desmosterolosis confirmed by genetic analysis. Four living individuals were examined. All had a severe neurologic phenotype with psychomotor retardation, microcephaly, spasticity, severe convulsions, nystagmus, and strabismus. Brain MRI showed ventriculomegaly, decreased white matter, and partial or complete agenesis of the corpus callosum. Other features included failure to thrive, microretrognathia, and contractures of the hands. Dysmorphic facial features were not observed. Biochemical studies of 2 affected boys showed significantly increased desmosterol levels compared to controls. Desmosterol accounted for 3.4% and 10%, respectively, of the total sterols compared to less than 0.04% in controls. Their unaffected fathers had increased levels compared to controls (0.1%), but not as high as their affected sons. |Schaaf et al. (2011) reported a female infant with desmosterolosis confirmed by genetic analysis (606418.0005 and 606418.0006). The patient was born prematurely at 34 weeks' gestation and showed macrocephaly, hydrocephalus, hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, and generalized arthrogryposis. Dysmorphic features included prominent forehead, telecanthus, short nose with anteverted nares, retrognathia, and low-set ears. She also had rhizomesomelia, fifth finger clinodactyly, mild cutaneous 2-4 toe syndactyly, and proximal placement of the big toes. She had developmental delay associated with enlarged and abnormal ventricles and an effaced gyral pattern, and radiographs showed eventration of the right anterior medial diaphragm. |
520000::the disorder can be caused by mutation in several mitochondrial genes, including MTTL1 (590050), MTTE (590025), and MTTK (590060).The most common mutation is a 3243A-G transition in the MTTL1 gene (590050.0001).|Maternally inherited diabetes-deafness syndrome (MIDD) is a mitochondrial disorder characterized by onset of sensorineural hearing loss and diabetes in adulthood. Some patients may have additional features observed in mitochondrial disorders, including pigmentary retinopathy, ptosis, cardiomyopathy, myopathy, renal problems, and neuropsychiatric symptoms (Ballinger et al., 1992; Reardon et al., 1992; Guillausseau et al., 2001). |The association of diabetes and deafness is observed with Wolfram syndrome (see 222300), Rogers syndrome (249270), and Herrmann syndrome (172500), but all 3 of these disorders have other clinical manifestations.|Kressmann (1976) reported a large family in which diabetes and deafness were transmitted over 4 generations, with a total of 13 affected individuals. The clinical history was the same for all affected patients: the first manifestation was deafness, beginning at 20 to 30 years of age, with a rapid and severe increase in bilateral sensory hearing loss. Diabetes mellitus developed later in the third decade, and insulin was required either immediately or at a later date. At that time, persons from the fourth generation who were less than 20 years of age presented no deafness or diabetes. No pedigree member had ptosis, ophthalmoplegia, or muscle weakness. Reexamination of members of the family by Negrier et al. (1998) demonstrated no ragged-red fibers on skeletal muscle biopsy specimens and very limited lipid storage on electron microscopy.|Ballinger et al. (1992) described a family in which a mother, all of her 6 children by 2 husbands, and a granddaughter of 1 daughter had diabetes and deafness. The onset of diabetes was between ages 20 and 30 years except for 1 male in whom diabetes was first diagnosed at about age 43 years. The characteristics of the deafness were not specified. (Wallace (1992) indicated that the hearing loss was neurosensory and relatively late in onset; however, deafness generally preceded diabetes.) No member of the pedigree had ptosis, ophthalmoplegia or muscle weakness, features of other mitochondrial deletion syndromes. Infarcts occurred in the first generation and in 1 member of the second generation. In 1 of the patients, administration of Zidovudine (400-500 mg/d), a known inhibitor of mitochondrial replication, was associated with pancytopenia. |Van den Ouweland et al. (1992) observed maternally transmitted type II diabetes mellitus and deafness in 3 generations of a Dutch family. All 9 children of a woman with noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus had NIDDM and deafness; 2 grandchildren through a female also had the combination. None of the diabetic subjects showed optic atrophy, mental retardation, photomyoclonus, epilepsy, or myopathy. |Reardon et al. (1992) described a family with MIDD. Diabetes was associated with deafness in 7 individuals in 3 generations, only some of whom were available for study. Reduction of circulating insulin levels was a presenting feature of a multisystem disorder without significant neurologic involvement in this kindred. The proband presented with diabetes in his mid-twenties and received insulin therapy. Progressive bilateral hearing impairment was noted in his late thirties. ECG showed left bundle branch block and an echocardiographic diagnosis of cardiomyopathy was made shortly before his death at age 43. A salt-and-pepper retinopathy was noted in some affected members of the family. |Schulz et al. (1993) reported the case of a 47-year-old deaf man who was admitted for his first acute manifestation of hyperglycemia. Progressive bilateral sensorineural hearing loss had started in his early twenties. He had a 2-year history of dizziness, unsteady gait, and epilepsy. He also had pigmentary retinal degeneration with normal visual acuity but concentric narrowing of visual fields, external ophthalmoplegia, impaired vestibular function, and dysarthria. |Velho et al. (1996) reported 5 French pedigrees with the common 3243A-G mutation associated with variable clinical features, ranging from normal glucose tolerance to insulin-requiring diabetes. They described the clinical phenotypes of affected members and detailed evaluations of insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity in 7 mutation-positive individuals who had a range of glucose tolerance from normal to impaired to NIDDM. All subjects, including those with normal glucose tolerance, demonstrated abnormal insulin secretion on at least 1 test. The data suggested to Velho et al. (1996) that a defect of glucose-regulated insulin secretion is an early and possible primary abnormality in carriers of the mutation. They speculated that this defect may result from the progressive reduction of oxidative phosphorylation and may implicate the glucose-sensing mechanism of beta cells. |Guillausseau et al. (2001) ascertained 54 patients with type II diabetes mellitus and the 3243 mtDNA mutation through 16 departments of internal medicine and diabetes and metabolic diseases in France. On average, patients with maternally inherited diabetes and deafness were young at diabetes onset and presented with a normal or low body mass index. None was obese. Maternal family history of diabetes was found in 73% of probands. Diabetes was noninsulin-dependent at onset in 87% of patients; however, 46% of patients had noninsulin-dependent disease at onset but progressed to insulin therapy after a mean duration of approximately 10 years. Neurosensory hearing loss was present in almost all patients. In 86% of patients who had received an ophthalmologic examination, macular pattern dystrophy (a specific retinal lesion of MIDD) was found. Myopathy was present in 43%, cardiomyopathy in 15%, and neuropsychiatric symptoms in 18% (9 of 51). Although the prevalence of diabetic retinopathy was 8% among patients who had received an ophthalmologic examination, a lower than expected percentage after a mean 12-year duration of diabetes, the prevalence of kidney disease was 28%. This suggested that a specific renal involvement results from mitochondrial disease. Fischel-Ghodsian (2001) suggested that early treatment with nephroprotective agents, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, may be beneficial in heading off the renal disease. | Ogun et al. (2012) reported a 54-year-old woman with the 3243A-G MTTL1 mutation in heteroplasmic state (40% in skeletal muscle) who had ptosis since her early teens, with worsening in her forties. She had hearing loss since her early twenties. Although visual acuity was normal, funduscopy showed macular dystrophy with a perimacular ring of retinal atrophy in both eyes, characteristic of MIDD. She did not have cardiac disease or diabetes, but her mother and brother both had deafness, and her brother had diabetes. |
222100::The type of diabetes mellitus called IDDM is a disorder of glucose homeostasis that is characterized by susceptibility to ketoacidosis in the absence of insulin therapy. It is a genetically heterogeneous autoimmune disease affecting about 0.3% of Caucasian populations (Todd, 1990). Genetic studies of IDDM have focused on the identification of loci associated with increased susceptibility to this multifactorial phenotype. |The classical phenotype of diabetes mellitus is polydipsia, polyphagia, and polyuria which result from hyperglycemia-induced osmotic diuresis and secondary thirst. These derangements result in long-term complications that affect the eyes, kidneys, nerves, and blood vessels.|The term diabetes mellitus is not precisely defined and the lack of a consensus on diagnostic criteria has made its genetic analysis difficult. Diabetes mellitus is classified clinically into 2 major forms of the primary illness, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM; 125853), and secondary forms related to gestation or medical disorders.|Appearance of the IDDM phenotype is thought to require a predisposing genetic background and interaction with other environmental factors. Rotter and Rimoin (1978) hypothesized that there are at least 2 forms of IDDM: a B8 (DR3)-associated form characterized by pancreatic autoimmunity, and a B15-associated form characterized by antibody response to exogenous insulin. Interestingly, the DR3 and DR4 alleles seem to have a synergistic effect on the predisposition to IDDM based on the greatly increased risk observed in persons having both the B8 and B15 antigens (Svejgaard and Ryder, 1977). Rotter and Rimoin (1979) hypothesized a combined form. Tolins and Raij (1988) cited clinical and experimental evidence to support the idea that those IDDM patients in whom diabetic nephropathy (see 603933) eventually develops may have a genetic predisposition to essential hypertension. |Gambelunghe et al. (2001) noted heterogeneity of the clinical and immunologic features of IDDM in relation to age at clinical onset. Childhood IDDM is characterized by an abrupt onset and ketosis and is associated with HLA-DRB1*04-DQA1*0301-DQB1*0302 and a high frequency of insulin and IA-2 autoantibodies. On the other hand, the so-called latent autoimmune diabetes of the adult (LADA) is a slowly progressive form of adult-onset autoimmune diabetes that is noninsulin-dependent at the time of clinical diagnosis and is characterized by the presence of glutamic acid decarboxylase-65 (GAD65: 138275) autoantibodies and/or islet cell antibodies. |
125853::more than one gene is involved in the causation of noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM).|See 601283 for description of a form of NIDDM linked to 2q, which may be caused by mutation in the gene encoding calpain-10 (CAPN10; 605286). See 601407 for description of a chromosome 12q locus, NIDDM2, found in a Finnish population. See 603694 for description of a locus on chromosome 20, NIDDM3. See 608036 for description of a locus on chromosome 5q34-q35, NIDDM4. See 616087 for description of NIDDM5, which comprises susceptibility related to a nonsense mutation in the TBC1D4 gene (612465) on chromosome 13q22.|A mutation has been observed in hepatocyte nuclear factor-4-alpha (HNF4A; 600281.0004) in a French family with NIDDM of late onset. Mutations in the NEUROD1 gene (601724) on chromosome 2q32 were found to cause type II diabetes mellitus in 2 families. Mutation in the GLUT2 glucose transporter was associated with NIDDM in 1 patient (138160.0001). Mutation in the MAPK8IP1 gene, which encodes the islet-brain-1 protein, was found in a family with type II diabetes in individuals in 4 successive generations (604641.0001). Polymorphism in the KCNJ11 gene (600937.0014) confers susceptibility. In French white families, Vionnet et al. (2000) found evidence for a susceptibility locus for type II diabetes on 3q27-qter. They confirmed the diabetes susceptibility locus on 1q21-q24 reported by Elbein et al. (1999) in whites and by Hanson et al. (1998) in Pima Indians. A mutation in the GPD2 gene (138430.0001) on chromosome 2q24.1, encoding mitochondrial glycerophosphate dehydrogenase, was found in a patient with type II diabetes mellitus and in his glucose-intolerant half sister. Mutations in the PAX4 gene (167413) have been identified in patients with type II diabetes. Triggs-Raine et al. (2002) stated that in the Oji-Cree, a gly319-to-ser change in HNF1-alpha (142410.0008) behaves as a susceptibility allele for type II diabetes. Mutation in the HNF1B gene (189907.0007) was found in 2 Japanese patients with typical late-onset type II diabetes. Mutations in the IRS1 gene (147545) have been found in patients with type II diabetes. A missense mutation in the AKT2 gene (164731.0001) caused autosomal dominant type II diabetes in 1 family. A (single-nucleotide polymorphism) SNP in the 3-prime untranslated region of the resistin gene (605565.0001) was associated with susceptibility to diabetes and to insulin resistance-related hypertension in Chinese subjects. Susceptibility to insulin resistance has been associated with polymorphism in the TCF1 (142410.0011), PPP1R3A (600917.0001), PTPN1 (176885.0001), ENPP1 (173335.0006), IRS1 (147545.0002), and EPHX2 (132811.0001) genes. The K121Q polymorphism of ENPP1 (173335.0006) is associated with susceptibility to type II diabetes; a haplotype defined by 3 SNPs of this gene, including K121Q, is associated with obesity, glucose intolerance, and type II diabetes. A SNP in the promoter region of the hepatic lipase gene (151670.0004) predicts conversion from impaired glucose tolerance to type II diabetes. Variants of transcription factor 7-like-2 (TCF7L2; 602228.0001), located on 10q, have also been found to confer risk of type II diabetes. A common sequence variant, rs10811661, on chromosome 9p21 near the CDKN2A (600160) and CDKN2B (600431) genes has been associated with risk of type II diabetes. Variation in the PPARG gene (601487) has been associated with risk of type 2 diabetes. A promoter polymorphism in the IL6 gene (147620) is associated with susceptibility to NIDDM. Variation in the KCNJ15 gene (602106) has been associated with T2DM in lean Asians. Variation in the SLC30A8 gene (611145) has been associated with susceptibility to T2D. Variation in the HMGA1 gene (600701.0001) is associated with an increased risk of type II diabetes. Mutation in the MTNR1B gene (600804) is associated with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes. |Noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus is distinct from MODY (606391) in that it is polygenic, characterized by gene-gene and gene-environment interactions with onset in adulthood, usually at age 40 to 60 but occasionally in adolescence if a person is obese. The pedigrees are rarely multigenerational. The penetrance is variable, possibly 10 to 40% (Fajans et al., 2001). Persons with type II diabetes usually have an obese body habitus and manifestations of the so-called metabolic syndrome (see 605552), which is characterized by diabetes, insulin resistance, hypertension, and hypertriglyceridemia. |Protection Against Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus|Protein-truncating variants in the SLC30A8 (611145) have been associated with a reduced risk for T2D.|
304790::X-linked immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, and enteropathy (IPEX) is caused by mutation in the FOXP3 gene (300292) on chromosome Xp11.|IPEX is an X-linked recessive immunologic disorder characterized by onset in infancy of severe diarrhea due to enteropathy, type 1 diabetes mellitus, and dermatitis. Other features may include hypothyroidism, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, lymphadenopathy, hepatitis, and nephritis. The disorder may be fatal before age 2 years if not aggressively treated. Long-term therapeutic options include immunosuppression and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (review by d'Hennezel et al., 2012). |Powell et al. (1982) described a 'new' X-linked syndrome in a large kindred in which 8 males in 3 generations connected through females had various combinations of intractable diarrhea, eczema, hemolytic anemia, diabetes mellitus, or thyroid autoimmunity. Exaggerated responses to viral infections were noted. Only 2 of the 8 survived the first decade. Death in infancy or early childhood occurred in 11 additional males in the kindred; these occurred with infections or shortly after immunizations. B-cell function, T-cell numbers, polymorph chemotaxis, and complement concentrations were normal. |Satake et al. (1993) described a Japanese family in which 2 brothers and their maternal uncle suffered from a presumably X-linked autoimmune enteropathy with hemolytic anemia and polyendocrinopathy. Two of the boys died from severe diarrhea accompanied by total or subtotal intestinal villous atrophy. The third affected male showed the same symptoms and had circulating IgG antibodies against enterocytes, but his condition improved dramatically and he became well following the use of cyclosporin A (CSA). |Peake et al. (1996) reported the cases of 4 related male infants who presented with neonatal diabetes mellitus, immune dysregulation with extremely high concentrations of immunoglobulin E, and intractable diarrhea. All of the infants were from 1 family, and all of them died. They had an exfoliative skin eruption and frequent infections. The diabetes was insulin-dependent and very difficult to regulate. One of the patients sustained a cardiac arrest 10 minutes after he was 'introduced to a branched chain amino acid supplement.' He was believed to have had an anaphylactic reaction to the formula. Necropsy showed apparent agenesis of the islets of Langerhans, a normal exocrine pancreas, normal small bowel, generalized mild to moderate lymphoid hyperplasia, and low-grade, nonspecific hepatitis. In a second case, the child died at 19 months of age from overwhelming sepsis. A third boy died at 10 weeks of age. Postmortem examination showed no macroscopic abnormalities; microscopic specimens were not available for interpretation. The same disorder may have been described by Meyer et al. (1970). Two brothers had absent islet cells, neonatal IDDM, diarrhea, and failure to thrive. One brother had numerous infections (including fungal infections, thigh abscess, and discharging ears) and died at 4 months; the other died at 32 days, also of infection. The mother had 10 brothers who died of unknown causes in infancy, and a healthy sister. Some of the features were similar to those of Omenn syndrome (603554), but diabetes does not occur in that disorder which is inherited as an autosomal recessive. The disorder in this family appeared to be X-linked recessive. The 4 affected males occurred in separate sibships in 3 generations, connected through presumably carrier females. |Goulet et al. (1998) studied the clinical and histopathologic features of 47 infants with intractable diarrhea and villous atrophy of varying degrees, dividing them into 2 groups, with or without lamina propria mononuclear cell infiltration. Of the 24 patients with an infiltrate, 12 had extraintestinal manifestations of autoimmunity, including arthritis, diabetes, nephrotic syndrome, dermatitis, anemia, thrombocytopenia, and tended to have a later onset of diarrhea (median, 5 months of age) with larger volumes. |Additional families were reported by Roberts and Searle (1995) and Di Rocco and Marta (1996). Most of the affected males developed autoimmune phenomena and immunologic abnormalities within the first 6 months of life, and most died within the first year of life. Immunologic abnormalities were highly variable, but intermittent eosinophilia and elevated IgE levels were documented in several patients. Ferguson et al. (2000) identified a family with a similar X-linked disorder characterized by autoimmunity and variable immunodeficiency. Affected males developed autoimmune endocrinopathy (type I diabetes mellitus and/or hypothyroidism), enteropathy characterized by villous atrophy, chronic dermatitis, and variable immunodeficiency. Only 1 affected male in this family survived beyond the age of 2 years. |Levy-Lahad and Wildin (2001) described 2 premature male sibs and 1 maternal half brother with intrauterine growth retardation/failure to thrive, an inflammatory enteropathy presenting as bowel hypomobility with mucosal erosion and relatively primitive-appearing gut epithelium, endocrinopathy (neonatal diabetes mellitus in 2, hypothyroidism in 1, and parathyroid hormone resistance in 1), and thrombocytopenia and coagulopathy in 2. All died by 5 months of age. |Gambineri et al. (2008) reported the clinical features of 14 unrelated male patients with genetically confirmed IPEX syndrome. All patients presented with symptoms in the first year of life, mainly severe watery diarrhea due to enteropathy and/or hyperglycemia or ketoacidosis due to diabetes mellitus. Dermatitis or eczema was also common. Less common features included thyroid disease (3 patients), hemolytic anemia (3 patients), thrombocytopenia (2 patients), and hepatitis (3 patients). Immunologic studies before immunosuppressive treatment showed normal white blood cell counts and normal immunoglobulin levels, except in 1 patient who had intestinal protein loss. Most patients had increased serum IgE and eosinophilia, and many had serum autoantibodies despite immunosuppressive therapy. There was variable severity: 3 patients with null mutations or mutations in functional domains had a severe form of the disease, whereas patients with splicing mutations had a less severe form. However, there was no correlation between FOXP3 protein expression and disease severity, since nonfunctional mutant proteins were expressed at normal levels. Gambineri et al. (2008) suggested that patients who present in infancy with autoimmune enteropathy or diabetes should be screened for FOXP3 mutations. |Jonas et al. (1991) reported the cases of 2 unrelated male infants who presented in the first days of life with brittle insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and subsequently developed severe secretory diarrhea with stool volumes of more than 100 ml/kg/day. No etiology or effective therapy was discovered for the diarrhea and both infants succumbed to septicemia, malnutrition, and poor control of hyperglycemia. At autopsy, both were found to have absence of islets of Langerhans in the pancreas and diffuse dysplastic changes in the mucosa of the small and large intestine. The entire alimentary tract in each case was lined by epithelia more typical of foregut mucosa: secretory-like glands, absent crypts of Lieberkuhn, and absent villi. One of the infants was Asian and one Caucasian. Meyer et al. (1970) described congenital IDDM due to hypoplastic pancreas in 2 infant brothers who had 10 maternal uncles who had died in infancy of unknown causes. Dodge and Laurence (1977) described congenital IDDM and absent islets in a male infant who died on the second day of life and whose brother was likewise very small for dates and died at the age of 40 days. |Eisenbarth and Gottlieb (2004) compared the features of 3 autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes: autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type I (240300); autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type II, or Schmidt syndrome (269200); and X-linked polyendocrinopathy with immune dysfunction and diarrhea. |
222730::dicarboxylic aminoaciduria (DBCXA) is caused by homozygous mutation in the SLC1A1 gene (133550) on chromosome 9p24.|Teijema et al. (1974) described a female child with a defect in renal and probably intestinal transport of 2 acidic amino acids, glutamic and aspartic acids. The child was mentally retarded and also showed moderate hyperprolinemia and hypoglycemia. |Melancon et al. (1977) reported a 38-month-old male infant with large amounts of the dicarboxylic amino acids, aspartic and glutamic, in the urine without generalized aminoaciduria and without neurologic and developmental abnormalities. The patient was found soon after birth by routine screening. Intestinal transport and in vitro oxidation of dicarboxylic amino acids suggested that the basic defect was selective, one of renal conservation. Transport defects have been observed in 4 other groups of amino acids: beta-amino acids, dibasic amino acids, amino acids and glycine, and neutral amino acids. The authors found a report of dicarboxylic aminoaciduria and associated fasting hypoglycemia and mental retardation. In a later study in which 500 mentally retarded children were screened for amino acid disorders, Swarna et al. (1989) found 1 case of dicarboxylic aminoaciduria in a girl. |Bailey et al. (2011) reported a 44-year-old Australian man of Italian ancestry who presented with kidney stones at the age of 20. His brother also reported kidney stones at the same age. The proband was diagnosed with dicarboxylic aminoaciduria by urinary analysis, which showed elevations in urinary glutamate level (1,377 micromol/mmol creatinine) and aspartate level (46 micromol/mmol creatinine). All other urinary amino acids were normal. He had life-long evidence of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD; 164230) but declined formal psychologic assessment. The brother of the proband was diagnosed with dicarboxylic aminoaciduria at age 40 after similar screenings showed elevated levels of glutamate and aspartate (1,052 and 51 micromol/mmol creatinine, respectively). Bailey et al. (2011) also reported a second proband, a 4-year-old girl of French Canadian descent, who had been diagnosed with dicarboxylic aminoaciduria at birth by newborn screening. Urinary analysis at age 4 confirmed the diagnosis. No other members of her family were affected. |
188400::DiGeorge syndrome is caused by a 1.5- to 3.0-Mb hemizygous deletion of chromosome 22q11.2. Haploinsufficiency of the TBX1 gene (602054) in particular is responsible for most of the physical malformations. There is evidence that point mutations in the TBX1 gene can also cause the disorder.|DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) comprises hypocalcemia arising from parathyroid hypoplasia, thymic hypoplasia, and outflow tract defects of the heart. Disturbance of cervical neural crest migration into the derivatives of the pharyngeal arches and pouches can account for the phenotype. Most cases result from a deletion of chromosome 22q11.2 (the DiGeorge syndrome chromosome region, or DGCR). Several genes are lost including the putative transcription factor TUPLE1 which is expressed in the appropriate distribution. This deletion may present with a variety of phenotypes: Shprintzen, or velocardiofacial, syndrome (VCFS; 192430); conotruncal anomaly face (or Takao syndrome); and isolated outflow tract defects of the heart including tetralogy of Fallot, truncus arteriosus, and interrupted aortic arch. A collective acronym CATCH22 has been proposed for these differing presentations. A small number of cases of DGS have defects in other chromosomes, notably 10p13 (see 601362). In the mouse, a transgenic Hox A3 (Hox 1.5) knockout produces a phenotype similar to DGS as do the teratogens retinoic acid and alcohol.|DiGeorge syndrome overlaps clinically with the disorder described by the Japanese as 'conotruncal anomaly face syndrome' (Kinouchi et al., 1976; Takao et al., 1980; Shimizu et al., 1984), where the cardiovascular presentation is the focus of attention. The term conotruncal anomaly face syndrome is cumbersome and has the disadvantage of using embryologic assumptions as a title. It would be appropriate to use Takao syndrome for those cases with a preponderant cardiac presentation in contrast to the low T cell and hypocalcemic presentation in infancy of DiGeorge syndrome and the craniofacial and palatal abnormalities typical of Shprintzen syndrome. These 3 phenotypes may be seen in the same family and most cases of all 3 categories have been shown to have a 22q11 deletion. This led Wilson et al. (1993) to propose the acronym CATCH22 (Cardiac Abnormality/abnormal facies, T cell deficit due to thymic hypoplasia, Cleft palate, Hypocalcemia due to hypoparathyroidism resulting from 22q11 deletion) as a collective acronym for those with the common genetic etiology. Shprintzen (1994) objected to 'lumping' velocardiofacial syndrome with the DiGeorge anomaly, arguing that there is 'no valid evidence to suggest that velocardiofacial syndrome is etiologically heterogeneous...[whereas] the DiGeorge anomaly is known to be so.' Hall (1993) cited data of Driscoll et al. (1993) indicating that velocardiofacial syndrome is etiologically heterogeneous. She stated that '...68% of Shprintzen syndrome patients...have been recognised to have deletions of 22q11.' Shprintzen (1994) refuted her statement, maintaining that it could accurately be stated that deletion was found in 68% of patients sent to the Driscoll laboratory with a diagnosis of velocardiofacial syndrome made by other clinicians. Shprintzen (1994) said that in his sample, 100% had deletion. |Burn (1999), one of the original proposers of the acronym CATCH22, reviewed the discussion of nomenclature. He recognized that the term CATCH22 had a number of negative connotations and that in practice different terms were in use for this phenotype and would continue to be so. Burn (1999) proposed that the term DiGeorge syndrome be reserved for those with neonatal presentation, particularly with thymic hypoplasia and hypocalcemia, and that the designation VCFS be used for children with a presentation dominated by nasal speech due to palatal insufficiency. He also suggested that 'conotruncal anomaly face' be replaced by 'Takao syndrome' and pointed out that the term '22q11 deletion syndrome' was reasonable. Finally, Burn (1999) proposed that 'CATCH phenotype' be used rather than CATCH22 and that the acronym be taken to represent cardiac abnormality, T cell deficit, clefting, and hypocalcemia. |DiGeorge syndrome is characterized by neonatal hypocalcemia, which may present as tetany or seizures, due to hypoplasia of the parathyroid glands, and susceptibility to infection due to a deficit of T cells. The immune deficit is caused by hypoplasia or aplasia of the thymus gland. A variety of cardiac malformations are seen in particular affecting the outflow tract. These include tetralogy of Fallot, type B interrupted aortic arch, truncus arteriosus, right aortic arch and aberrant right subclavian artery. In infancy, micrognathia may be present. The ears are typically low set and deficient in the vertical diameter with abnormal folding of the pinna. Telecanthus with short palpebral fissures is seen. Both upward and downward slanting eyes have been described. The philtrum is short and the mouth relatively small. In the older child the features overlap Shprintzen syndrome (velocardiofacial syndrome) with a rather bulbous nose and square nasal tip and hypernasal speech associated with submucous or overt palatal clefting. Cases presenting later tend to have a milder spectrum of cardiac defect with ventricular septal defect being common.|Short stature and variable mild to moderate learning difficulties are common. A variety of psychiatric disorders have been described in a small proportion of adult cases of velocardiofacial syndrome. These have included paranoid schizophrenia and major depressive illness. Clinical features seen more rarely include hypothyroidism, cleft lip, and deafness.|Goodship et al. (1995) described monozygotic twin brothers with precisely the same 22q11.2 deletion but somewhat discordant clinical phenotype. Both twins had a small mouth, square nasal tip, short palpebral fissures, and small ears with deficient upper helices. Twin 1 had bilateral hair whorls and twin 2 had a right-sided hair whorl. Toes 4 and 5 were curled under bilaterally in both boys, this being more marked in twin 1. The twins were said to have had a single placenta although the findings of a detailed examination were not recorded. Twin 1 weighed 2,200 g and twin 2 weighed 2,800 g. Twin 1 had tetralogy of Fallot, which was repaired at 1 year of age. Twin 2 had a normal cardiovascular system. Twin 1 started taking steps at 24 months of age, while his brother stood at 13 months and walked steadily at 18 months. These observations indicated to Goodship et al. (1995) that differences in deletion size and modifying genetic loci are not responsible for all the phenotypic differences observed in CATCH22. |Vincent et al. (1999) reported the case of female monozygotic twins with 22q11 deletions. The twins shared facial characteristics of DGS/VCFS and immunologic defect. However, only one, who died on day 5, had a cardiac defect, comprised of an interrupted aortic arch with a ventricular septal defect, a truncus arteriosus, and a large arterial duct. The authors stated that this was the fourth report of a discrepant cardiac status between monozygotic twins harboring 22q11 deletions. |Wilson et al. (1992) looked for deletions in 9 families with 2 or more cases of outflow tract heart defects. In 5 of the families, chromosome 22 deletions were detected in all living affected persons studied and also in the clinically normal father of 3 affected children. The deletion was transmitted from parents to offspring and was associated with an increase in the severity of cardiac defects. No deletions were found in 4 families in which the parents were normal and affected sibs had anatomically identical defects, presumably an autosomal recessive form of congenital heart defect. |Fokstuen et al. (1998) analyzed 110 patients with nonselective syndromic or isolated nonfamilial congenital heart malformations by fluorescence in situ hybridization using the D22S75 DGS region probe. A 22q11.2 microdeletion was detected in 9 of 51 (17.6%) syndromic patients. Five were of maternal origin and 4 of paternal origin. None of the 59 patients with isolated congenital cardiac defect had the 22q11.2 deletion. In a study of 157 consecutively catheterized patients with isolated, nonsyndromic cardiac defects, and 25 patients with cardiac malformation and additional abnormalities (10 of whom had been clinically diagnosed as DiGeorge syndrome or velocardiofacial syndrome), Borgmann et al. (1999) found the 22q11.2 microdeletion only in the latter group. |Jawad et al. (2001) studied 195 patients with chromosome 22q11 deletion syndrome and found that diminished T-cell counts in the peripheral blood are common. The pattern of changes seen with aging in normal control patients was also seen in patients with the chromosome 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, although the decline in T cells was blunted. Autoimmune disease was seen in most age groups, although the types of disorders varied according to age. Infections were also common in older patients, although they were seldom life-threatening. Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis with onset between 1.5 and 6 years of age was seen in 4 of the 195 patients; idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura with onset at 1 to 8 years of age was seen in 8 of 195 patients; autoimmune hemolytic anemia, psoriasis, vitiligo, inflammatory bowel disease, adult rheumatoid arthritis, and rheumatic fever with chorea were each seen in 1 patient of the 195 patients sampled. |Kawame et al. (2001) reported 5 patients with chromosome 22q11.2 deletion that manifested Graves disease between the ages of 27 months and 16 years, and suggested that Graves disease may be part of the clinical spectrum of this disorder. |Bassett et al. (2005) described the phenotypic features of 78 adults with 22q11 deletion syndrome and identified 43 distinct features present in more than 5% of patients. Common characteristic features included intellectual disabilities (92.3%), hypocalcemia (64%), palatal anomalies (42%), and cardiovascular anomalies (25.8%). Other less commonly appreciated features included obesity (35%), hypothyroidism (20.5%), hearing deficits (28%), cholelithiasis (19%), scoliosis (47%), and dermatologic abnormalities (severe acne, 23%; seborrhea, 35%). Significantly, schizophrenia was present in 22.6% of patients. |Maalouf et al. (2004) reported an African American male diagnosed at age 32 years with dysgenesis of the parathyroid glands due to a chromosome 22 microdeletion. Symptomatic hypocalcemia did not develop until age 14 years, a few weeks after initiation of anticonvulsant therapy for generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Because of the timing for onset of symptomatic hypocalcemia, it was presumed that the patient had anticonvulsant-induced hypocalcemia, and he carried that diagnosis for 18 years. Chromosome 22q11 deletion syndrome was first suspected at age 32 years. The diagnosis was confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis. This case underscores the variable clinical presentation of this congenital form of hypoparathyroidism. |Kousseff (1984) described 3 sibs with a syndrome of sacral meningocele, conotruncal cardiac defects, unilateral renal agenesis (in 1 sib), low-set and posteriorly angulated ears, retrognathia, and short neck with low posterior hairline. Kousseff (1984) suggested autosomal recessive inheritance. Toriello et al. (1985) reported a similar, isolated case and designated the disorder Kousseff syndrome. Forrester et al. (2002) restudied the family reported by Kousseff (1984) and identified a 22q11-q13 deletion in the proband, his deceased brother, and his father. The proband had spina bifida, shunted hydrocephalus, cleft palate, short stature, cognitive impairment, and the typical craniofacial features of velocardiofacial syndrome, including low-set and dysplastic ears, broad base of the nose, narrow alae nasi, and retrognathia. His brother had died at 2 weeks of age with myelomeningocele, hydrocephalus, transposition of the great vessels, and unilateral renal agenesis, and his sister had died at 22 days of age with myelomeningocele, truncus arteriosus, hypocalcemia, and autopsy findings of absent thymus and parathyroid glands, consistent with DiGeorge anomaly. |Maclean et al. (2004) reported 2 unrelated patients with Kousseff syndrome, 1 with a 22q11.2 deletion and the other without. The first was a 4-year-old girl with a sacral myelomeningocele, tetralogy of Fallot, microcephaly, hydrocephalus, hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, and moderate developmental delay, who had a normal chromosome 22q11.2 FISH test and did not exhibit the facial phenotype of VCFS. The second patient, a male infant who died at 10 days of age, had a large sacral myelomeningocele, hydrocephalus, Arnold-Chiari malformation, atrial septal defect, conoventricular ventricular septal defect, type B interrupted aortic arch, hypocalcemia, and suspected duodenal stenosis; FISH testing revealed a 22q11.2 microdeletion. Maclean et al. (2004) concluded that Kousseff syndrome is a distinct clinical entity that is genetically heterogeneous. |Kujat et al. (2006) reported that 5 (83%) of 6 patients with a 22q11.2 microdeletion had renal anomalies, including renal dysplasia, hydronephrosis, and unilateral renal agenesis. |Robin et al. (2006) reviewed clinical data including brain imaging on 21 patients with polymicrogyria associated with deletion 22q11.2 and another 11 patients from the literature. The authors found that the cortical malformation consisted of perisylvian polymicrogyria of variable severity and frequent asymmetry with a striking predisposition for the right hemisphere (p = 0.008). |Forbes et al. (2007) reported the ocular features of 90 consecutive patients with confirmed 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Posterior embryotoxon was found in 49%, tortuous retinal vessels in 34%, eyelid hooding in 20%, strabismus in 18%, ptosis in 4%, amblyopia in 4%, and tilted optic nerves in 1%.|Sundaram et al. (2007) described 2 patients with 22q11.2 deletion who had absent uterus and unilateral renal agenesis. One patient also had mild developmental delay, hypoparathyroidism, and psychiatric symptoms; the other patient also had high-arched palate, bulbous nasal tip, bicuspid aortic valve, short stature, and primary amenorrhea. Sundaram et al. (2007) suggested that mullerian or uterine/vaginal agenesis be included as part of the clinical spectrum of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. Scheuerle (2008) reported a 14-year-old Latin American girl with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome who was found to have unilateral renal agenesis, uterine didelphys with duplication of the cervix, and imperforate vaginal hymen with hematometrocolpos. |Binenbaum et al. (2008) reported 4 boys and 3 girls with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, including 5 who had bilateral sclerocornea. Other eye findings included descemetocele in 5 eyes, microphthalmia in 1 eye, severe anterior segment dysgenesis in 1 eye, and bilateral iridocorneal adhesions in 1 patient. Binenbaum et al. (2008) suggested that a genetic locus at chromosome 22q11.2 may be involved in anterior segment embryogenesis, and that sclerocornea should be added to the clinical manifestations of the 22q11.2 deletion syndrome. |Cheung et al. (2014) used a logistic regression model to investigate potential predictors of intellectual disability severity, including neonatal hypocalcemia, neonatal seizures, and complex congenital heart disease in 149 adults with 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, 10 of whom had moderate to severe intellectual disability. The model was highly significant (p less than 0.0001), showing neonatal seizures (p = 0.0018) and neonatal hypocalcemia (p = 0.047) to be significant predictors of a more severe level of intellectual disability. Neonatal seizures were significantly associated with hypocalcemia in the entire sample, regardless of intellectual level. |
246900::dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency (DLDD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the DLD gene (238331) on chromosome 7q31.|DLD deficiency is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder characterized biochemically by a combined deficiency of the branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase complex (BCKDC), pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC), and alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (KGDC). This is the result of E3 being a common component of all 3 mitochondrial multienzyme complexes. Clinically, affected individuals have lactic acidosis and neurologic deterioration due to sensitivity of the central nervous system to defects in oxidative metabolism. E3 deficiency is often associated with increased urinary excretion of alpha-keto acids, such as pyruvate (summary by Hong et al., 1996). E3 deficiency can also be associated with increased concentrations of branched-chain amino acids, as observed in maple syrup urine disease (MSUD; 248600), and is sometimes referred to as 'MSUD type III,' although patients with E3 deficiency have additional biochemical defects (Chuang and Shih, 2001; Robinson, 2001). |Robinson et al. (1977) reported a male child, born of Caucasian first-cousin parents, who died at age 7 months with progressive neurologic deterioration and persistent metabolic acidosis. He was well until age 8 weeks, when he abruptly became ill with irregular labored respiration, increased muscle tone, bilateral optic atrophy, and metabolic acidosis. He had elevated blood pyruvate, lactate, alpha-ketoglutarate, and branched-chain amino acids, as well as occasional hypoglycemia. Thiamine therapy was of no benefit. Postmortem tissue analysis showed deficiency of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, and specifically of dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase, or E3. Robinson et al. (1981) reported another similar case. The parents were normal in both cases, but the parents of 1 patient had decreased enzyme activity at about 30 to 42% of normal, supporting recessive inheritance. A primary deficiency of this enzyme had been suggested as the basic defect in Friedreich ataxia (229300), but Robinson et al. (1981) concluded that the deficiency in Friedreich ataxia is likely a secondary phenomenon. |In a case of E3 deficiency, Matalon et al. (1981) found that oral administration of lipoic acid resulted in almost complete clearance of abnormal organic aciduria and lactic and pyruvic acidemia, with clinical improvement. The patient had neonatal hypothermia, failure to thrive, and metabolic acidosis. In cultured fibroblasts, the E3 component was 23% of the control mean. Munnich et al. (1982) reported a 6-month-old girl with vomiting, hypotonia, and motor retardation who had combined chemical features of lactic acidosis, maple syrup urine disease, and ketoglutaric aciduria. E3 activity was reduced. |Sakaguchi et al. (1986) reported a patient with E3-deficient MSUD. In the first week of life, the patient's blood leucine was found to be 5 mg/dl, but the patient was left on a normal diet. At the age of 6 months, he exhibited hypotonia and minimal dystonic movements of the upper limbs. He had elevated plasma levels of pyruvate, alpha-ketoglutarate, and branched-chain amino acids and alpha-keto acids. Urinary excretion of these keto acids and their metabolites were also elevated. At 7 months of age, the patient was placed on a diet restricted in branched-chain amino acids, resulting in improvement of some biochemical and developmental parameters. The patient died at the age of 21 months, following a ketoacidotic episode. The total pyruvate dehydrogenase complex activity of the patient's cells was 10 to 30% that of control cells. Pyruvate dehydrogenase (E1) and dihydrolipoamide acetyltransferase (E2) activities were normal in the patient's muscle, but E3 activity was not detectable in either muscle or liver specimens obtained at autopsy. |In 3 males born to first-cousin Algerian parents and presenting with hypotonia, metabolic acidosis, and hyperlactatemia immediately after birth, Bonnefont et al. (1992) described a 'new' inborn error of the tricarboxylic acid cycle, alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. Neurologic deterioration resulted in death at about 30 months of age. In a review of the patients reported by Bonnefont et al. (1992), Odievre et al. (2005) noted that 1 of the patients had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The patients showed lack of accumulation of branched-chain amino acids or pyruvate, but KGDC activity was markedly deficient. In fibroblasts derived from these patients, Odievre et al. (2005) identified a homozygous mutation in the DLD gene (R447G; 238331.0012). E3 activity was about 20% of controls, and residual activity of the PDC and BCKDC were 63% and 56% of controls, respectively, which was likely sufficient to prevent accumulation of pyruvate and branched-chain amino acids. |Craigen (1996) described a 6-month-old female infant who presented with hypotonia, ketolactic acidosis, and an MRI of the brain that showed subacute necrotizing encephalomyelopathy consistent with Leigh syndrome (LS; 256000). Enzymatic analysis demonstrated deficiency of lipoamide dehydrogenase. Treatment with lipoic acid and later with dichloroacetate led to a significant but transient decline in serum lactate levels, but no clinical improvement. Hong et al. (1996) also studied the patient reported by Craigen (1996). She had developmental delay, hypotonia, metabolic acidosis, transient neonatal hypoglycemia, and poor sucking. Plasma amino acid analysis in the patient initially showed increased branched-chain amino acids, and urinary organic acid analysis showed mild to moderate increases of lactic, 2-hydroxybutyric, 3-hydroxybutyric, alpha-ketoglutaric, and 3-hydroxyisovaleric acids. She died at age 28 months. Activities of the PDC and E3 in patient lymphocytes were 26% and 2% of control values, respectively, and in patient fibroblasts were 11% and 14%, respectively. KGDC activity in fibroblasts was 20%. Corresponding values in the clinically unaffected parents were about 50% of normal, except for KGDC, which was normal. These findings suggested that a partial reduction in E3 is not rate-limiting for KGDC activity in fibroblasts. Glycine was also not increased in the patient. |Shany et al. (1999) reported a 9-month-old girl of Muslim origin with a severe neurodegenerative form of DLDD. She presented on the third day of life with apathy, poor feeding, and lethargy. Laboratory studies showed hypoglycemia and severe lactic acidosis, but normal levels of branched-chain keto acids and alpha-ketoglutarate. Muscle biopsy showed no activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, severely decreased activity of the alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex (2%), and decreased DLD activity at 15% of controls. Each unaffected parent had about 50% reduced DLD protein activity. The patient had recurrent episodes of metabolic acidosis, often triggered by infection. Clinical features included microcephaly, lack of psychomotor development, blindness, deafness, hypotonia, brisk reflexes, and mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. |Hong et al. (2003) described 4 patients with DLD deficiency. Two were a sister and brother, born of consanguineous Palestinian Arab Muslim parents. The sister died in infancy during an episode of repeated vomiting associated with encephalopathy. Two earlier-born sibs had died under similar circumstances. Her brother had recurrent episodes of vomiting associated with encephalopathy from age 8 months. Examination at age 10 years showed generalized muscle weakness and wasting, ataxic gait, hepatomegaly, and lactic acidemia. He was treated with riboflavin, coenzyme Q, biotin, and carnitine. Six years later, he was functioning well at a normal school, but had slight ataxia and intention tremor. The 2 other patients, both of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, had a severe form of E3 deficiency. One had repeated episodes of hypoglycemia and was in a persistent vegetative state at age 4 years; he died soon after. A girl had recurrent episodes of repeated vomiting and acidosis since infancy; she died of hepatic failure at age 5 years. All 4 patients, including the Arab sibs, were homozygous for a G229C mutation (238331.0006) that is a founder allele among Ashkenazi Jews. All patients had decreased levels of the E3 protein (range, 35-68% of controls) and decreased E3 activity (8 to 33% of controls). Hong et al. (2003) emphasized the favorable outcome in the 1 child treated with riboflavin and additional supplements. |Cameron et al. (2006) reported 2 second-cousin Ashkenazi Jewish boys with DLD deficiency. They had different genotypes and variable severity. One presented on the second day of life with metabolic acidosis and seizures, and showed episodes of myocardial and hepatic dysfunction, but had a relatively mild course of recurrent encephalopathy up to 8.5 years of age. The other presented at age 14 months with developmental delay, hypotonia, weakness, and microcephaly, and had multiple episodes of decompensation. Both patients had decreased activities of the KGDH (25% and 44%, respectively) and BCKDH (58% and 62%, respectively) complexes, but PDH complex activity was at the low end of normal (69% and 59%, respectively). DLD activity was decreased in both patients. |Shaag et al. (1999) studied 13 patients with E3 deficiency originating from 7 Ashkenazi Jewish families. The disease course was highly variable, with a variable age at onset. Some patients had few neurologic sequelae and long survival. Two patients presented immediately after birth, 9 around age 2 years, and 2 as adults. All had recurrent episodes of vomiting, abdominal pain, and hepatomegaly, usually associated with neurologic signs during the episodes. Episodes were associated with lactic acidosis, abnormal liver enzymes, and prolonged prothrombin time. Biochemical anomalies, such as increased branched-chain amino acids and increased alpha-ketoacids, were not commonly found. The 2 patients who presented neonatally had residual neurologic damage with attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder, mild ataxia, motor incoordination, muscle hypotonia, and weakness. Nine patients who presented in early childhood or as adults suffered from exertional fatigue between episodes of decompensation but were otherwise asymptomatic and showed normal psychomotor development. Two patients died because of intractable metabolic acidosis and multiorgan failure. In all patients E3 activity was reduced to 8 to 21% of the control value in muscle or lymphocytes. In 4 patients tested, the E3 protein in muscle was reduced to 20 to 60% of control. Eleven patients were homozygous for a founder mutation in the DLD gene (G229C; 238331.0006) and 2 were compound heterozygous for G229C and a 1-bp insertion (238331.0003). Shaag et al. (1999) concluded that the phenotype associated with G229C is milder than that associated with other genotypes. However, the phenotype did not appear to be associated with residual enzyme activity. |
222748::dihydropyrimidinase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the DPYS gene (613326) on chromosome 8q22.|DPYS deficiency is an autosomal recessive disease characterized by the presence of dihydropyrimidinuria. The clinical phenotype is highly variable, ranging from early infantile onset of severe neurologic involvement, dysmorphic features, and feeding problems to late onset of mild intellectual disability and even asymptomatic individuals. Patients with a complete or partial deficiency have an increased risk of developing severe toxicity after administration of the anticancer drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) (summary by Nakajima et al., 2017). |See also dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency (274270), a similar disorder.|Duran et al. (1991) reported a Turkish male infant, the fifth child of a consanguineous couple, who was thought to have dihydropyrimidinase deficiency. The infant was well until the age of 8 weeks when he developed feeding problems following the introduction of fruits to his formula milk. He was admitted to a hospital following a convulsion and lowered consciousness associated with metabolic acidosis. At the age of 19 months, his physical and mental development appeared to be normal. The presence of dihydrouracil and dihydrothymine in bodily fluids suggested the diagnosis.|Van Gennip et al. (1997) reported an infant girl, born of consanguineous Lebanese parents, who presented at birth with low anal atresia, club foot and hip dysplasia on the right side, hypoplastic terminal phalanges and nails of fingers and toes, plagiocephaly, and facial dysmorphism. Psychomotor delay was evident by the age of 3 months. Neurologic examination showed severe retardation, convulsions, extrapyramidal dyskinesia, and pyramidal signs. Biochemical studies showed increased urinary dihydrouracil, dihydrothymine, uracil, and thymine, consistent with DPYS deficiency. The authors provided the first direct evidence at the enzyme level for deficient activity of DHP in this patient's liver. |According to van Gennip et al. (1997), 4 cases of dihydropyrimidinuria had been reported. The patients showed a variable clinical phenotype comprising seizures (3 of 4 patients), mental retardation (2 patients), growth retardation (1 patient), and dysmorphic features (1 patient). All patients excreted large amounts of dihydrouracil and dihydrothymine and moderate amounts of uracil and thymine in their urine. |Assmann et al. (1997) described a boy, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, who suffered from intractable diarrhea due to congenital microvillus atrophy (251850). He developed severe cholestasis starting at 2 weeks of age and leading to liver cirrhosis. He died of septicemia at the age of 7 months. Marked elevations of dihydrouracil and dihydrothymine, as well as markedly elevated excretion of uracil and thymine in urine, were repeatedly demonstrated, suggesting a disorder of pyrimidine degradation. An enzymatic defect of 5,6-dihydropyrimidine amidohydrolase was demonstrated in liver biopsy. Assmann et al. (1997) raised the question of whether this was 1 disorder or 2 independent recessive disorders and whether this might represent a hitherto undescribed contiguous gene syndrome. |Hamajima et al. (1998) stated that 9 cases of dihydropyrimidinuria had been reported. |Van Kuilenburg et al. (2007) reported 2 brothers, born of nonconsanguineous Moroccan parents, with DPYS deficiency. The older brother presented at age 4 years with a severe delay in speech development, but normal motor development. IQ was 93. Brain MRI showed slight widening of the lateral ventricles and thinning of the parietooccipital white matter. His brother had normal psychomotor development and an IQ of 83. Both had mildly increased urinary uracil and thymine, and strongly increased dihydrouracil and dihydrothymine. Van Kuilenburg et al. (2007) suggested that altered homeostasis of uracil, thymine, beta-alanine and beta-aminoisobutyric acid may underlie the various clinical abnormalities reported in DPYS deficiency. Beta-alanine is a structural analog of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glycine, which are major inhibitory neurotransmitters in the central nervous system. However, additional factors besides DPYS deficiency are likely necessary for the onset of a clinical phenotype. |Nakajima et al. (2017) described 4 unrelated dihydropyrimidinase-deficient patients, 1 Chinese and 3 Japanese, who presented with highly elevated levels of 5,6-dihydrouracil and 5,6-dihydrothymine in urine and variable clinical presentations ranging from asymptomatic to infantile spasms with reduced white matter and brain atrophy. Nakajima et al. (2017) stated that 31 genetically confirmed patients with DPYS deficiency had been reported. |
274270::dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the DPYD gene (612779) on chromosome 1p21.|Dihyropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency shows large phenotypic variability, ranging from no symptoms to a convulsive disorder with motor and mental retardation in homozygous patients. In addition, homozygous and heterozygous mutation carriers can develop severe toxicity after the administration of the antineoplastic drug 5-fluorouracil (5FU), which is also catabolized by the DPYD enzyme. This is an example of a pharmacogenetic disorder (Van Kuilenburg et al., 1999). |Since there is no correlation between genotype and phenotype in DPD deficiency, it appears that the deficiency is a necessary, but not sufficient, prerequisite for the development of clinical abnormalities (Van Kuilenburg et al., 1999; Enns et al., 2004). |Berger et al. (1984) presented findings in 3 unrelated patients (2 boys and 1 girl) with a nonspecific clinical picture of cerebral dysfunction and persistent urinary excretion of excessive amounts of uracil, thymine, and 5-hydroxymethyluracil. The excretory pattern suggested deficiency of DPD. The parents of 1 patient were first cousins, suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance. |Wadman et al. (1984) postulated deficiency of DPD as the cause of the thymine-uraciluria they observed in a child with autism. |Brockstedt et al. (1990) commented that 7 of the 8 previously reported pediatric patients were Dutch. They reported a ninth pediatric patient who had developmental retardation, epilepsy, and muscular hypertonia. |Van Gennip et al. (1994) described a Dutch patient with a severe form of DPD deficiency. At age 25 months, the patient had bilateral microphthalmia, coloboma of the iris and choroid, nystagmus, and gradually increasing psychomotor retardation. |Vreken et al. (1997) reported a child with DPD deficiency who showed febrile convulsions, severe neuromotor retardation, and spastic tetraplegia at age 9 months. Cerebral MRI showed ventriculomegaly with white matter hypodensity. At the age of 6 years, thymine-uraciluria was noted and DPD deficiency was demonstrated in fibroblasts. An earlier-born child had died before her first birthday with severe neuromotor retardation and febrile convulsions. Genetic analysis identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the DPYD gene (611779.0005). |Enns et al. (2004) reported a 17-month-old girl, born to consanguineous Pakistani parents, who had a history of failure to thrive, developmental delay, and encephalopathy with prolonged hypoventilation. Other features included microcephaly, strabismus, nystagmus, hypotonia, and mild hepatomegaly. Brain MRI showed prominent sulci and abnormal signals in the cerebral white matter and brainstem. Urinary profile showed increased uracil and thymine consistent with DPD deficiency. She developed seizures at age 22 months, and died at age 31 months of recurrent aspiration pneumonia. |Tuchman et al. (1985) described a 27-year-old woman who had an unusually severe reaction to 5-FU given in limited dosage on a weekly schedule. Symptoms included stomatitis, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, hair loss, diarrhea, fever, marked weight loss, cerebellar ataxia, and neurologic symptoms, progressing to semicoma. High levels of uracil and thymine were found in the urine of the patient and of 1 brother; both had very high plasma and urinary concentrations of pyrimidine bases. Serum levels and urinary excretion of uric acid were normal in all members of the family, and the patient's white cell thymidine kinase (TK; 188300) was normal. The mother's urine showed a small amount of uracil but no thymine. A second brother and a sister showed none of the abnormalities. The authors suggested that the defect may be in dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, which is involved in pyrimidine base degradation. The defect would not be expected to be apparent clinically unless the subject was given a pyrimidine-base analog. |Diasio et al. (1988) reported a previously healthy 40-year-old woman who suffered severe neurotoxicity due to 5-fluorouracil given for breast cancer. After administration of a 'test' dose of 5-fluorouracil, the patient showed a markedly prolonged elimination half-life (159 min), with no evidence of catabolites of the drug in plasma or cerebrospinal fluid, and 89.7% of the administered dose was excreted into the urine as unchanged drug. Partial deficiency of the enzyme was found also in the patient's father; the mother was deceased. The enzyme was assayed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. |In an adult patient with asymptomatic DPD deficiency from a family studied by (Sumi et al., 1996), Hayashi et al. (1996) demonstrated metabolic changes predicting a risk of severe 5-fluorouracil toxicity. On restudy of the family of this patient, a sister of the proband was found to excrete large amounts of dihydrouracil and dihydrothymine. The parents and the child of the propositus showed slight increases of dihydrouracil and dihydrothymine. This was the first reported instance of a family with 2 cases of DPD deficiency. A uracil loading test performed on the parents showed increased urinary dihydrouracil concentrations consistent with heterozygosity. Hayashi et al. (1996) noted that individuals with decreased DPYD activity may show increased adverse effects of 5FU treatment. |Of 53 cases of DPD deficiency associated with 5FU-related toxicity reviewed by Milano et al. (1999), 19 cases had moderate or marked DPD deficiency, with less than 70% of the mean population value. More of the cases occurred in women (15 of 19), which was in accord with several previous reports (e.g., Milano et al., 1992). The toxicity score was significantly higher in patients with markedly low DPD activity. Neurotoxicity was the predominant manifestation; cardiotoxicity was observed in only 1 case. None of the reported cases had complete DPD deficiency, even in the 2 patients that died. |
605850::dimethylglycine dehydrogenase deficiency is caused by homozygous mutation in the DMGDH (605849).|Moolenaar et al. (1999) described a 38-year-old man of African ancestry who was in good health and had normal intelligence. However, he complained of an abnormal body odor, which resembled the odor of fish, since the age of 5 years. The fish odor had led to severe psychologic and professional problems and increased under stress and effort. Furthermore, the patient complained of unusual muscular fatigue. Plasma creatine kinase was consistently approximately 4-fold higher than the upper limit of the reference interval. Routine clinical chemical and hematologic determinations, including serum cobalamin and urea, were unremarkable. In addition, plasma folate and homocysteine were within the normal range. Analysis of very long chain fatty acids and a carnitine ester profile were normal, as were the results of amino acid and organic acid analyses of blood and urine. The brothers, sisters, and 2 sons of the patient were without signs or symptoms. Moolenaar et al. (1999) used nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to study serum and urine from the patient. The concentration of N,N-dimethylglycine (DMG) was increased approximately 100-fold in serum and 20-fold in urine. The presence of DMG as a storage product was confirmed by use of NMR spectroscopy and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. The high concentration of DMG was caused by a deficiency of the enzyme dimethylglycine dehydrogenase. This deficiency was the first inborn error of metabolism discovered by use of in vitro NMR spectroscopy of body fluids. Moolenaar et al. (1999) concluded that DMGDH deficiency must be added to the differential diagnosis of patients complaining of fish odor. |
246200::Donohue syndrome is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the insulin receptor gene (INSR; 147670) on chromosome 19p13.|Among the children of second cousins once removed, Donohue and Uchida (1954) observed 2 sisters with the following features: apparent cessation of growth at about the seventh month of gestation, peculiar facies creating a gnomelike appearance and leading to the designation, and severe endocrine disturbance indicated by emaciation, enlargement of breasts and clitoris, and histologic changes in the ovaries, pancreas and breasts. Three abortions (1 child at 4 months, the others earlier) had been experienced by this mother. The patients died at 46 and 66 days of age, respectively. |Two affected sisters were reported by Lakatos et al. (1963). Salmon and Webb (1963) observed a patient with consanguineous parents. Dekaban (1965) found normal chromosomes. Der Kaloustian et al. (1971) described 2 unrelated patients born of consanguineous parents. |Schilling et al. (1979) found a defect in insulin receptors in a Canadian Indian infant, the son of first cousins once removed. Emaciation, absence of subcutaneous fat, decreased muscle mass, hirsutism, and low-set, poorly developed ears were features. Sudden death occurred at age 47 days. Profound hyperinsulinemia and insulin receptor function in cultured fibroblasts. At autopsy, marked hypertrophy of pancreatic beta cells was noted. Epidermal growth factor, although chemically related to insulin, showed normal binding. |Bier et al. (1980) concluded that hypoglycemia in leprechaunism is due to an accelerated fasting state. Elfin facial appearance, growth retardation, severely diminished subcutaneous adipose tissue stores, decreased muscle mass, hypertrichosis, pachyderma, and acanthosis nigricans were cited as notable clinical features. See Seip syndrome (269700). |Elsas et al. (1985) stated that 31 patients with leprechaunism had been reported since the original description by Donohue (1948). They summarized the phenotype as follows: severe intrauterine growth retardation; small, elfin-like face with protuberant ears; distended abdomen; relatively large hands, feet, and genitalia; and abnormal skin with hypertrichosis, acanthosis nigricans, and decreased subcutaneous fat. At autopsy, patients have shown cystic changes in membranes of gonads and hyperplasia of pancreatic islet cells. |Taylor et al. (1981) studied cultured lymphocytes from a patient with leprechaunism and extreme insulin resistance previously attributed to a postreceptor defect (Kobayashi et al., 1978). They found that in fact the patient had an inborn error affecting insulin receptor function. Receptor binding was abnormal in having decreased sensitivity to alterations in temperature and pH. However, the level of insulin binding to cells from the patient was within normal limits. Thus, insulin resistance probably resulted from a decreased ability of the receptor to couple insulin binding to insulin action. |From studies of an infant with leprechaunism and the parents, Elsas et al. (1985) concluded that the family had 2 different recessive mutations that impair high-affinity insulin-receptor binding and that the proband was a genetic compound. The 2 mutations produced structural changes in the receptor that altered subunit interaction and resulted in loss of high-affinity binding and cellular responsiveness. After oral glucose, the proband showed marked hyperinsulinism, the father showed mild hyperinsulinism, and the mother had a normal response. The proband's fibroblasts had no high-affinity binding of insulin but normal low-affinity binding. Cells from the mother had 60% and those from the father 20% of high-affinity binding and normal low-affinity binding. The patient studied by Elsas et al. (1985), a black female, was 8 years old at the time of report. Most patients have died by the age of 10 months. The same patient, designated 'Arkansas I,' was studied by Kobayashi et al. (1978), Taylor et al. (1981), and others. In studies of probands and parents from 3 unrelated families, Endo et al. (1987) demonstrated heterogeneity of a defect in insulin receptor. One of the 3, 'Arkansas I,' showed defective alpha-subunit interaction. |Geffner et al. (1987) studied a female patient with very high levels of insulin. There was evidence of residual insulin activity in the form of cystic ovarian enlargement with gonadotropin-independent steroid secretion and persistent, severe myocardial hypertrophy. Geffner et al. (1987) concluded that the response to supraphysiologic concentrations of insulin was mediated via the insulin-like growth factor receptor mechanism which remained intact. |Reddy et al. (1988) studied insulin receptor function in cultured skin fibroblasts from 3 patients with leprechaunism. The cell lines in all 3 patients showed insulin binding less than 15% of control values. In 1 cell line this was primarily due to reduced affinity of the receptor; in the other 2, it was due to a reduced number of receptors. When expressed as a fraction of total insulin bound, the percentage of cell-associated insulin internalized and degraded did not differ between the patient cell lines and the controls. Reddy et al. (1989) characterized a second family of leprechaunism (Ark-2) and found defects of insulin receptor phosphorylation in the phenotypically normal parents. |Reddy and Kahn (1989) demonstrated a functional abnormality of the epidermal growth factor receptor (131550), as well as of the insulin receptor, in 3 unrelated patients with leprechaunism. The abnormality was due to a decrease in receptor affinity in 2 of the cases and to a decrease in receptor number in the third. In all 3 cell lines studied, EGF-stimulated receptor autophosphorylation was also decreased, whereas EGF internalization and degradation were normal. The type A syndrome of insulin resistance and acanthosis nigricans showed no abnormality of EGF receptor. Reddy and Kahn (1989) proposed that 'a more fundamental defect beyond the insulin receptor alone is the probable cause of leprechaunism.' |Psiachou et al. (1993) reported a female infant with leprechaunism who was homozygous for a mutation in the INSR gene. Both parents, who were first cousins, were heterozygous for the mutant allele and phenotypically and clinically normal. The patient, who died at 4 months of age, had grossly retarded bone age, with the distal femoral epiphysis not being evident at 3 months of age. She had high fasting growth hormone (GH) values without a rise in IGF-I concentrations as well as an inadequate response to exogenously administered GH, implying growth hormone resistance. Psiachou et al. (1993) suggested that this resistance was a secondary effect caused by downregulation of GH receptor activity in the presence of high concentrations of insulin proximal to the cell membrane, with consequent limitation of IGF-I formation and cellular growth. Thus, although the primary defect in leprechaunism is in the insulin receptor gene, a secondary defect is probably responsible for an impaired response to endogenous GH and growth failure. |In a Yemeni family, Al-Gazali et al. (1993) observed what they considered to be a mild form of leprechaunism in 4 males and 1 female out of 8 offspring of second-cousin parents. The patients had insulin resistance with paradoxical hypoglycemia and acanthosis nigricans. However, unlike infants with classic leprechaunism who die in the first year of life, all the children were alive, the oldest being 11 years of age; furthermore, all had normal subcutaneous tissue and some showed a normal growth pattern. Ultrasound studies showed thickened myocardium and enlarged kidneys, and the female had ovarian enlargement. |
223360::orthostatic hypotension-1 (ORTHYP1) due to congenital dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the DBH gene (609312) on chromosome 9q34.|Genetic Heterogeneity of Orthostatic Hypotension|See also ORTHYP2 (618182), caused by mutation in the CYB561 gene (600019) on chromosome 17q11.|Robertson et al. (1986) reported a 33-year-old woman of Scottish-Irish descent with isolated failure of autonomic noradrenergic neurotransmission caused by a defect in the beta-hydroxylation of dopamine in peripheral nerves. Clinical features included orthostatic hypotension, ptosis, nasal stuffiness, and a neonatal history of delayed eye opening. From age 2 years, she had had episodes of syncope, especially after exercise, and marked ptosis. Parasympathetic and sympathetic cholinergic functions were normal. Plasma norepinephrine levels were less than 10% of normal and plasma dopamine levels were 5 to 10 times normal. Increase in plasma dopamine with the upright posture and with administration of yohimbine indicated that dopamine was released by physiologic and pharmacologic sympathetic stimulation. The early onset and general character of the disorder suggested a genetic basis, but there was no family history. |Biaggioni et al. (1990) reported a 42-year-old man with lifelong severe orthostatic hypotension, ptosis, nasal stuffiness, and retrograde ejaculation due to DBH deficiency. He had an isolated deficiency of norepinephrine in both central and peripheral neurons. |Robertson et al. (1991) reviewed dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency in detail on the basis of the first 6 published cases. Affected neonates may show a delay in opening of the eyes, up to 2 weeks in some cases, and ptosis of eyelids. The infants have occasionally been so sickly at birth that parents were advised their survival was unlikely. Hypotension, hypoglycemia, and hypothermia may occur early in life. Postural hypotension occurring with exertion has limited the ability of DBH-deficient patients to exercise during childhood. The syncope associated with postural hypertension has led to trials of anticonvulsive medication. Symptoms generally worsen in late adolescence and early adulthood. Reduced exercise tolerance, ptosis of the eyelids, nasal stuffiness, and prolonged or retrograde ejaculation are features. Retrograde ejaculation is recognized by the presence of semen in the post-ejaculation urine void. The patients are distinguished from familial dysautonomia (223900) by (1) normal tearing, (2) intact corneal and deep tendon reflexes, (3) normal sensory function, (4) normal senses of taste and smell, and (5) lack of the cholinergic sensitivity and intradermal histamine response typical of the latter condition. Robertson et al. (1991) noted that at the time of their report, no patients had been of Ashkenazi Jewish extraction. |Patients with Orthostatic Hypotension without Known Mutations|Man in't Veld et al. (1987) described a similar case in a 21-year-old woman with severe orthostatic hypotension. Ptosis, skeletal muscle hypotonia, and recurrent hypoglycemia had been noticed from early childhood. There was virtually complete loss of noradrenergic innervation but intact cholinergic function. Noradrenaline and adrenaline were not detectable in plasma, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid, but dopamine was increased 7- to 12-fold in plasma, 4-fold in urine, and 20-fold in CSF. Measurements of catecholamine metabolites showed further evidence for impairment of noradrenaline and adrenaline biosynthesis due to deficient dopamine beta-hydroxylation. Dopamine beta-hydroxylase was undetectable in plasma and CSF. Physiologic and pharmacologic stimuli of sympathetic neurotransmitter release caused increases in plasma dopamine rather than in plasma noradrenaline. Man in't Veld et al. (1987) concluded that the patient had congenital dopamine beta-hydroxylase deficiency. There were no other affected individuals in the family, the parents were unrelated, and 2 sibs were in good health. As useful controls, 12 other patients with orthostatic hypotension, either idiopathic or due to other causes such as hereditary amyloidosis (see, e.g., 105200), primary amyloidosis, diabetic neuropathy (see 603933), multiple system atrophy (146500), or amyloidosis with multiple myeloma, were studied and found to have normal levels of dopamine in the plasma.|Mathias et al. (1990) described a brother and sister with long-standing symptoms of postural hypotension. In the male, erection was unaffected, but ejaculation was prolonged or absent. Autonomic function tests confirmed sympathetic adrenergic failure with normal sympathetic cholinergic and intact parasympathetic function. There were no other neurologic abnormalities. Plasma dopamine was elevated, but noradrenaline and adrenaline were undetectable in the plasma, as was dopamine beta-hydroxylase activity. In perivascular cutaneous tissue, DBH immunoreactivity was absent. The parents were clinically and biochemically normal. |
310200::Duchenne muscular dystrophy is caused by mutation in the gene encoding dystrophin (DMD; 300377).|Dystrophin-associated muscular dystrophies range from the severe Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) to the milder Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD; 300376). Mapping and molecular genetic studies indicate that both are the result of mutations in the huge gene that encodes dystrophin, also symbolized DMD. Approximately two-thirds of the mutations in both forms are deletions of one or many exons in the dystrophin gene. Although there is no clear correlation found between the extent of the deletion and the severity of the disorder, DMD deletions usually result in frameshift. Boland et al. (1996) studied a retrospective cohort of 33 male patients born between 1953 and 1983. The mean age at DMD diagnosis was 4.6 years; wheelchair dependency had a median age of 10 years; cardiac muscle failure developed in 15% of patients with a median age of 21.5 years; smooth muscle dysfunction in the digestive or urinary tract occurred in 21% and 6% of the patients, respectively, at a median age of 15 years. In this cohort, death occurred at a median age of 17 years. The authors commented that the diagnosis of DMD is being made at an earlier age but survival has not changed.|The most distinctive feature of Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a progressive proximal muscular dystrophy with characteristic pseudohypertrophy of the calves. The bulbar (extraocular) muscles are spared but the myocardium is affected. There is massive elevation of creatine kinase levels in the blood, myopathic changes by electromyography, and myofiber degeneration with fibrosis and fatty infiltration on muscle biopsy.The onset of Duchenne muscular dystrophy usually occurs before age 3 years, and the victim is chairridden by age 12 and dead by age 20. The onset of Becker muscular dystrophy is often in the 20s and 30s and survival to a relatively advanced age is frequent.|Moser and Emery (1974) found that some female heterozygotes had myopathy resembling autosomal recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (253600). Serum creatine kinase was particularly elevated in these patients. In most populations, the frequency of manifesting heterozygotes is about the same as that of females with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy. |Soloway and Mudge (1979) remarked that patients with advanced muscular dystrophy may develop hypokalemia from insults (vomiting, diarrhea, diuretics) that would have little effect on normal persons. Reduced intracellular potassium stores are responsible for this perilous situation, which may be the mechanism of death. |In an Italian boy with congenital myopathy, born to nonconsanguineous parents, Prelle et al. (1992) found absence of dystrophin in the patient's muscle by immunohistochemical methods and a deletion of the 5-prime end of the dystrophin gene. Although the patient showed severe mental retardation, there was no cerebral atrophy. Cardiomyopathy was also present. |Frigeri et al. (1998) analyzed AQP4 expression in the skeletal muscle of mdx mice; immunofluorescence experiments showed a marked reduction of aquaporin-4 (AQP4; 600308) expression, suggesting a critical role in the membrane alteration of DMD. |Wakayama et al. (2002) analyzed skeletal muscle samples from 6 patients with DMD and found markedly reduced AQP4 expression by immunohistochemical staining and markedly decreased levels of AQP4 mRNA as measured by RT-PCR, compared to controls. Genomic analysis of the AQP4 gene revealed no abnormalities. The authors concluded that the reduced mRNA was due to either decreased transcription or increased degradation of the message. |Noguchi et al. (2003) performed cDNA microarray analysis on skeletal muscle biopsy specimens from 6 patients with DMD. There was increased expression of genes related to immune response, sarcomere, extracellular matrix proteins, and signaling or cell growth. Upregulation of these genes reflected dystrophic changes, myofiber necrosis, inflammation, and muscle regeneration. Genes related to muscle homeostasis and energy metabolism were downregulated. |Myocardial involvement appeared in a high percentage of DMD patients by about 6 years of age; it was present in 95% of cases by the last years of life. Severe cardiomyopathy did not develop before age 21 in BMD and few patients showed any cardiac signs before age 13 (Nigro et al., 1983). |Mirabella et al. (1993) noted that electrocardiographic abnormalities had been reported in 6.6 to 16.4% of DMD heterozygous females and that in one carrier female severe cardiomyopathy had been described in association with muscle weakness. They reported 2 carriers with dilated cardiomyopathy and increased serum CK but no symptoms of muscle weakness. Heart biopsies in both patients showed absence of dystrophin in many muscle fibers. |Noting that in DMD functional impairment of smooth muscle in the gastrointestinal tract can cause acute gastric dilatation and intestinal pseudoobstruction that may be fatal, Barohn et al. (1988) studied gastric emptying in 11 patients with DMD. Strikingly delayed gastric emptying times were observed. |Enigmatically, the extraocular muscles (EOMs) remain clinically unaffected during the course of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (Kaminski et al., 1992). Khurana et al. (1995) showed that dystrophin deficiency does not result in myonecrosis or pathologically elevated levels of intracellular calcium in the EOMs. They reported in vitro experiments demonstrating that extraocular muscles are inherently more resistant to necrosis caused by pharmacologically elevated intracellular calcium levels when compared with pectoral musculature. They suggested that the EOMs are spared in DMD because of their intrinsic ability to maintain calcium homeostasis better than other striated muscle groups. This suggested further that modulating levels of intracellular calcium in muscle may be of potential therapeutic use in DMD. |Mental retardation of mild degree is a pleiotropic effect of the Duchenne gene (Zellweger and Niedermeyer, 1965). As indicated later, the finding of dystrophin mRNA in brain may bear a relationship to the mental retardation in DMD patients. Emery et al. (1979) sought heterogeneity in DMD as one explanation for the high birth incidence. Affected boys were categorized according to whether they had severe mental handicap or not. Those with severe mental defect had later age of onset and confinement to wheelchair, less marked fall in creatine kinase with age, and a greater urinary excretion of certain amino acids. In 50 DMD patients with a mean age of 11.1 years (range 3.5 to 20.3), Bresolin et al. (1994) found that 31% had a Wechsler full intelligence quotient (FIQ) lower than 75 and that only 24% had appropriate IQ levels by this index. |Bushby et al. (1995) examined the hypothesis that the nature of the dystrophin mutation may influence the development of mental retardation. Previously, it had been shown that deletions removing the brain-specific promoter were compatible with normal intelligence. Bushby et al. (1995) studied 74 boys with DMD, 18% of which had a full scale IQ of below 70. The authors found no significant IQ difference between the patients with promoter deletions and those without, nor did they find a relationship between the length of the deletion and full scale IQ. They found, however, that boys with distal deletions were more likely to be mentally retarded than were those with proximal deletions. |Abnormal retinal neurotransmission as measured by electroretinography (ERG) was observed in boys with DMD by Cibis et al. (1993) and Pillers et al. (1993). Electroretinography is a recording of summed electrical signal produced by the retina when stimulated with a flash of light. The dark-adapted ERGs, recorded under scotopic testing conditions, have shown normal a-waves (a response of negative polarity generated by the photoreceptors) but reduced amplitude rod-isolated b-waves (a response of positive polarity originating primarily from the ON-bipolar cells) in DMD patients. This type of ERG abnormality with profound b-wave suppression is commonly associated with night blindness; however, there have been no reports of night blindness or any other visual abnormality in boys with DMD, and dark-adaptometry studies have been normal. Fitzgerald et al. (1994) used long-duration stimuli to separate ON (depolarizing bipolar cell) and OFF (hyperpolarizing bipolar cell) contributions to the cone-dominated ERG to understand better how the retina functions in boys with DMD. In the ERGs of 11 DMD boys, they found abnormal signal transmission at the level of the photoreceptor and ON-bipolar cell in both the rod and cone generated responses. Jensen et al. (1995) examined 16 boys with DMD/BMD of whom 10 had negative ERGs. Eight of the boys had DMD gene deletions downstream from exon 44. Normal dark adaptation thresholds were observed in all patients and there were no anomalous visual functions. Hence, negative ERG in DMD/BMD is not associated with eye disease. Normal ERGs were found in 6 boys with DMD/BMD. Jensen et al. (1995) speculated that a retinal or glial dystrophin may be truncated or absent in the boys with negative ERGs. |The ophthalmic features of DMD include normal ERG a-wave with reduced b-wave, normal visual acuity, and normal retinal morphology. Immunocytochemistry revealed strong AQP4 water channel expression in Muller cells in mouse retina and in fibrous astrocytes in optic nerve. Li et al. (2002) compared ERGs and retinal morphology in wildtype mice and transgenic knockout mice with no Aqp4. Significantly reduced ERG b-wave potentials were recorded in 10-month-old null mice with smaller changes in 1-month-old mice. Morphologic analysis of retina by light and electron microscopy showed no differences in retinal ultrastructure. That retinal function was mildly impaired in Aqp4-null mice suggested a role for Aqp4 in Muller cell fluid balance. The authors suggested that AQP4 expression in supportive cells in the nervous system facilitated neural signal transduction in nearby electrically excitable cells. |Costa et al. (2007) evaluated color vision in 44 patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy using 4 different color tests. Patients were divided into 2 groups according to the region of deletion in the dystrophin gene: 12 patients had deletion upstream of exon 30, and 32 downstream of exon 30. Of the patients with DMD, 47% (21/44) had a red-green color vision defect. Of the patients with deletion downstream of exon 30, 66% had a red-green color defect. No color defect was found in the patients with a deletion upstream of exon 30. A negative correlation between the color thresholds and age was found for the controls and patients with DMD, suggesting a nonprogressive color defect. The percentage (66%) of patients with red-green defect was significantly higher than the expected value (less than 10%) for the normal male population (P less than 0.001). Costa et al. (2007) suggested that the findings might be partially explained by a retinal impairment related to dystrophin isoform Dp260. |In a 9-year follow-up of study of 99 Dutch female carriers of DMD or BMD mutations, Schade van Westrum et al. (2011) found that 11 carriers (10%) (10 DMD and 1 BMD) fulfilled the criteria for dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Nine of the patients had developed DCM during the follow-up period. These carriers were on average older, were more symptomatic, and more often had hypertension, exertional dyspnea, and chest pain compared to mutation carriers without DCM. The findings suggested that female carriers of a mutation can develop progressive cardiac abnormalities and should undergo routine cardiac evaluation, preferably by echocardiology. |Mercier et al. (2013) reviewed the features of 26 female carriers of pathogenic mutations in the DMD gene who were referred for symptoms related to the disorder before 17 years of age. Five had a Duchenne-like phenotype with loss of ambulation before age 15 years, 13 had a Becker-like phenotype with muscle weakness but persistence of ambulation after age 15 years, and 8 had exercise intolerance. Initial symptoms included significant muscle weakness (88%), mostly affecting the lower limbs, or exercise intolerance (27%). Cardiac dysfunction was present in 19%, and cognitive impairment in 27%. Cognitive impairment was associated with mutations in the distal part of the gene. Muscle biopsy showed dystrophic changes in 83% and mosaic immunostaining for dystrophin in 81%. The X-chromosome inactivation pattern was biased in 62% of cases. Mercier et al. (2013) concluded that carrier females may have significant symptoms of the disorder. |
603165::Atopic dermatitis (ATOD), also known as eczema, is a common chronic pruritic inflammatory skin disease with a strong genetic component. Onset typically occurs during the first 2 years of life (review by Soderhall et al., 2007). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Atopic Dermatitis|Many inflammatory diseases, such as atopic eczema, are genetically complex, with multiple alleles at several loci thought to be involved in their pathogenesis. Several susceptibility loci for atopic dermatitis have been identified: ATOD1 on chromosome 3q21, ATOD2 (605803) on chromosome 1q21, ATOD3 (605804) on chromosome 20p, ATOD4 (605805) on chromosome 17q25.3, ATOD5 (603165) on chromosome 13q12-q14, ATOD6 (605845) on chromosome 5q31-q33, ATOD7 (613064) on chromosome 11q13.5, ATOD8 (613518) on chromosome 4q22.1, and ATOD9 (613519) on chromosome 3p24.|Atopic dermatitis commonly begins in infancy or early childhood (Kay et al., 1994; Taylor et al., 1984). Eighty percent of cases of ATOD have elevations of the total serum IgE (147050) concentration. The hallmarks of atopic dermatitis are a chronic relapsing form of skin inflammation, a disturbance of epidermal barrier function that culminates in dry skin, and IgE-mediated sensitization to food and environmental allergens. Bieber (2008) reviewed the natural history of ATOD. |The new occurrence of inflammatory diseases after organ transplantation suggests that genetic predisposition may be confined to the particular organs or physiologic systems. A new occurrence of asthma after bone marrow transplantation from a donor who had asthma (Agosti et al., 1988) or new asthma in a recipient who had lungs transplanted from an asthmatic donor (Corris and Dark, 1993) suggests that expression of some inflammatory disorders is a result of both systemic (often immune) influence and end-organ specificity, each under distinct genetic control. |Turner et al. (1998) described an 18-year-old woman who had had an intensely itchy rash on her right leg since childhood. There were no exacerbating factors. Her itch improved with sunlight. Topical corticosteroids gave only a small benefit. The patient also had hayfever, but was otherwise well. Her eczema was in an uninterrupted distribution down the inner aspect of her right leg in a pattern of Blaschko described by Jackson (1976) and thought to be the path of migration of a clone of embryonic keratinocytes. Histology of a biopsy specimen showed features typical of eczema and supported a diagnosis of linear eczema (dermatitic nevus). The rest of her skin was normal. She was found to be atopic with multiple positive prick tests (on normal skin), including house dust mite, feathers, and grass, and a raised IgE of 308 IU. In this patient, Turner et al. (1998) suspected that an aberrant clone of cells with either genetic (or epigenetic) change allowed expression of the atopic eczema phenotype in the mutated area only. As conventional treatments were largely unsuccessful and the area of involvement was small, Turner et al. (1998) excised the most itchy area of skin on her thigh as split skin. This produced only transient relief. Full skin thickness was excised from another area, and grafted with split skin from a donor area on her thigh. She had lasting relief for 6 years, although the itch persisted in her untreated skin. |
608089::mutations in various genes are responsible for susceptibility to endometrial cancer.|Approximately 20% of endometrial cancers demonstrate microsatellite instability (MSI) (Simpkins et al., 1999), a reflection of mutations in mismatch repair genes. The mismatch repair genes that have been identified as having a role in endometrial cancer include MSH2 (609309), MSH3 (600887), MSH6 (600678), MLH1 (120436), and MLH3 (604395). |In some families, endometrial cancer is associated with colorectal cancer in the same individual or individuals with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer type 1 (HNPCC1) or HNPCC2, also known as Lynch syndrome (120435). 'Lynch syndrome II' refers to extracolonic cancers, including endometrial cancers.|Mutation in the PTEN1 gene (601728) and somatic mutations in the CDH1 (192090) and FGFR2 (176943) genes have also been demonstrated in endometrial cancers.|Liu et al. (2003) found an association between the common 16189T-C transition within the D loop region of the mitochondrial chromosome and endometrial cancer; the mutation had previously been found to be associated with type II diabetes (125853) (Poulton et al., 1998) and dilated cardiomyopathy (Khogali et al., 2001). |Barnetson et al. (2007) reported a patient with endometrial adenocarcinoma and sebaceous carcinoma of the face who was compound heterozygous for 2 common mutations in the MUTYH gene (Y165C; 604933.0001 and G382D; 604933.0002). Colonic adenomas were not reported, but a paternal aunt reportedly had colorectal cancer in her thirties. Barnetson et al. (2007) noted that the phenotype associated with biallelic MUTYH mutations may include extracolonic manifestations, including endometrial cancer and sebaceous carcinoma, as seen in other inherited colorectal cancer syndromes such as Muir-Torre syndrome (158320) and Lynch syndrome (120435). |Pollock et al. (2007) identified 11 different somatic FGFR2 mutations (see, e.g., 176943.0010 and 176943.0015) in 3 (30%) of 10 endometrial cancer cell lines and in 19 (10%) of 187 primary endometrial carcinomas. The majority of the mutations were identical to germline activating mutations that cause skeletal dysplasias. There was no apparent correlation between FGFR2 mutation and overall survival.|Dutt et al. (2008) found somatic FGFR2 mutations in 15 (12.3%) of 122 primary endometrial carcinomas, as well as in 2 of 42 lung squamous cell carcinomas and in 2 of 46 cervical carcinomas. Many of the mutations were identical to those associated with congenital craniofacial developmental disorders. Ectopic expression of the mutations in mouse fibroblasts demonstrated constitutive activation and oncogenicity, and inhibition of FGFR2 kinase activity in endometrial cell lines bearing such FGFR2 mutations inhibited transformation and survival. |Le Gallo et al. (2012) used whole-exome sequencing to comprehensively search for somatic mutations in 13 primary serous endometrial tumors, and subsequently resequenced 18 genes that were mutated in more than 1 tumor and/or were components of an enriched functional grouping from 40 additional serous tumors. Le Gallo et al. (2012) identified high frequencies of somatic mutations in CHD4 (603277) (17%), EP300 (602700) (8%), ARID1A (603024) (6%), TSPYL2 (300564) (6%), FBXW7 (606278) (29%), SPOP (602650) (8%), MAP3K4 (602425) (6%), and ABCC9 (601439) (6%). Overall, 36.5% of serous tumors had a mutated chromatin-remodeling gene, and 35% had a mutated ubiquitin ligase complex gene, implicating frequent mutational disruption of these processes in the molecular pathogenesis of one of the deadliest forms of endometrial cancer. |The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network (2013) performed an integrated genomic, transcriptomic, and proteomic characterization of 373 endometrial carcinomas using array- and sequencing-based technologies. Uterine serous tumors and approximately 25% of high-grade endometrioid tumors had extensive copy number alterations, few DNA methylation changes, low estrogen receptor (see 133430)/progesterone receptor (607311) levels, and frequent TP53 (191170) mutations. Most endometrioid tumors had few copy number alterations or TP53 mutations, but frequent mutations in PTEN (601728), CTNNB1 (116806), PIK3CA (171834), ARID1A, and KRAS (190070) and novel mutations in the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex gene ARID5B (608538). A subset of endometrioid tumors had a markedly increased transversion mutation frequency and hotspot mutations in POLE (174762). The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network (2013) concluded that their results classified endometrial cancers into 4 categories: POLE ultramutated, microsatellite instability hypermutated, copy number-low, and copy number-high. Uterine serous carcinomas share genomic features with ovarian serous and basal-like breast carcinomas. The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network (2013) demonstrated that the genomic features of endometrial carcinomas permit a reclassification that may affect postsurgical adjuvant treatment for women with aggressive tumors. |
610247::Eosinophilic esophagitis (EOE) has an incidence of approximately 1 per 10,000 people. Symptoms include difficulty feeding, failure to thrive, vomiting, epigastric or chest pain, dysphagia, and food impaction. Individuals with EOE are predominantly young males with a high rate of atopic disease, and the diagnosis is made by endoscopy and biopsy findings of isolated eosinophils in the esophagus (summary by Rothenberg et al., 2010). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Eosinophilic Esophagitis,Eosinophilic esophagitis-1 (EOE1) is associated with variation at chromosome 7q11.2. Another locus (EOE2; 613412) has been been associated with variation in the TSLP gene (607003) on chromosome 5q22.|Eosinophilic esophagitis (EOE) is defined histologically by the presence of proliferative changes, including thickening of the basal epithelial layer and elongation of papillae, a minimum of 24 eosinophils per high-power field in the distal esophagus, and the absence of eosinophilia in any other intestinal segment. The disease is differentiated from reflux esophagitis (109350) on the basis of the magnitude of mucosal eosinophilia and lack of response to acid suppression (Noel et al., 2004). |In a population-based demographic study of pediatric eosinophilic esophagitis, Noel et al. (2004) identified 315 cases that met the diagnostic criteria. Further study of 103 of those patients revealed that 70% had coexisting eosinophilic involvement in the proximal esophagus; 71% were male, with a mean age of 10.5 years. Demographic analysis showed a strong familial pattern, including 3 sib pairs; and the mother of 1 of the sib pairs was also diagnosed with eosinophilic esophagitis.|
617290::early-onset vitamin B6-dependent epilepsy (EPVB6D) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the PROSC gene (604436) on chromosome 8p11.|Early-onset vitamin B6-dependent epilepsy is an autosomal recessive neurologic disorder characterized by onset of seizures in the neonatal period or first months of life. The seizures show favorable response to treatment with activated vitamin B6 (pyridoxal 5-prime-phosphate; PLP) and/or pyridoxine. However, most patients show delayed psychomotor development (summary by Darin et al., 2016).|Darin et al. (2016) reported 3 patients from a consanguineous Syrian family and 4 unrelated additional patients with infantile-onset seizures. Three of the patients showed abnormal intrauterine movements, and 4 showed signs of fetal distress. One infant from the Syrian family died at 4.5 months of age, and the other patients ranged in age from 3 to 16 years. All presented with seizures on the first day of life, except 1 patient who developed seizures at 1 month of age. Seizure manifestations included myoclonus, clonus, hypertonia, grimacing, apnea, respiratory distress, chewing, twitching, generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and stiffness. EEG tended to show a burst suppression pattern, often with reduced background activity. All patients had an immediate response to treatment with pyridoxine. After initial presentation, all children continued to have less frequent seizures and needed to be treated with multiple anticonvulsants. Four patients had their B6 treatment changed from pyridoxine to PLP, and all showed an improvement in seizure control. Several patients showed recurrence of seizures upon withdrawal of B6 treatment. The patients showed delayed psychomotor development with delayed language of variable severity and acquired microcephaly, although the 16-year-old was able to attend normal school. Brain imaging of most patients showed global underdevelopment of the brain, brain atrophy, enlarged ventricles, broad gyri, shallow sulci, reduced white matter, thin corpus callosum, and cysts, although 3 patients had normal brain imaging. Additional features included neonatal metabolic acidosis with increased lactate in 4 patients, anemia in 2 patients, and gastrointestinal dysfunction, including abdominal distension, vomiting, and necrotizing enterocolitis, in 3 patients. Four patients had minor dysmorphic features. Laboratory studies were consistent with abnormalities in B6 metabolism: 2 patients had low CSF PLP concentrations, and 3 had decreased activities of B6-dependent enzymes. |
612949::early infantile epileptic encephalopathy-39 (EIEE39) is caused by homozygous mutation in the SLC25A12 gene (603667) on chromosome 2q31.For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of EIEE, see EIEE1 (308350).|Wibom et al. (2009) reported a 3-year-old girl, born of distantly related Swedish parents, with severe psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, and hypomyelination of the central nervous system. Delayed development was first noted at age 5 months. Seizures and episodic apnea began at age 7 months. She had poor head control, could not roll over or grasp objects, and had poor eye contact. Plasma lactate was increased. She had no psychomotor development by age 3 years 8 months, and developed severe spasticity with hyperreflexia. Brain MRI showed global lack of myelination in the cerebral hemispheres and decreased supratentorial volume. The cerebellum, brainstem, and thalami were essentially normal. Focal lesions were not observed in gray matter. MR spectroscopy showed decreased N-acetylaspartate (NAA). |Wolf and van der Knapp (2009) commented that the patient described by Wibom et al. (2009) had a primary defect in the cortical gray matter, rather than a leukoencephalopathy. The reduced peak of NAA found on spectroscopy indicates neuronal degeneration, and impaired formation of myelin can result from neuronal dysfunction. In response, Kucinski et al. (2009) agreed that the primary defect in this condition is in the gray matter, and suggested that abnormal neuronal metabolism could result in disrupted crosstalk between neurons and oligodendrocytes, and defective myelination. However, neuronal dysfunction was not as apparent as the lack of normal myelin development in the imaging data. |Falk et al. (2014) reported 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Indian parents, with EIEE39. The proband was a 6.7-year-old girl who had onset of focal and generalized seizures at 10 months of age, followed by delayed psychomotor development and profound mental retardation with absent speech, inability to sit or walk, profound hypotonia, and inability to follow commands. Brain imaging showed delayed myelination and cerebral volume loss. MR spectroscopy showed decreased NAA and increased choline and lactate. Extensive metabolic work-up and muscle biopsy did not show any etiology. Her brother presented with seizures at age 10 months and a similar neurologic disorder as his sister. |
177000::erythropoietic protoporphyria-1 (EPP1) is caused by compound heterozygous or homozygous mutation in the gene encoding ferrochelatase (FECH; 612386) on chromosome 18q21. The disorder most often results from inheritance of a null FECH allele in trans with a low-expression FECH mutation (612386.0015) prevalent in some populations, resembling autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance.|Erythropoietic protoporphyria-1 is an inborn error of porphyrin metabolism caused by decreased activity of the enzyme ferrochelatase, the terminal enzyme of the heme biosynthetic pathway, which catalyzes the insertion of iron into protoporphyrin to form heme. EPP is characterized clinically by photosensitivity to visible light commencing in childhood, and biochemically by elevated red cell protoporphyrin levels (Todd, 1994). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Erythropoietic Protoporphyria|Also see X-linked erythropoietic protoporphyria (XLEPP; 300752), caused by mutation in the ALAS2 gene (301300) on chromosome Xp11, and EPP2 (618015), caused by mutation in the CLPX gene (615611) on chromosome 15q22.|Light-sensitive dermatitis commencing in childhood, usually before 10 years of age, is the presenting finding in erythropoietic protoporphyria (Peterka et al., 1965; DeLeo et al., 1976). Patients experience itching and burning, and develop erythema even after brief exposure to bright light. Chronic skin changes sometimes occur (Poh-Fitzpatrick, 1978). Herbert et al. (1991) described a second-degree burn of the light-exposed abdominal wall resulting from exposure during liver transplantation. The patient also had severe polyneuropathy with quadriparesis. Although most cases of EPP present in childhood, Henderson et al. (1995) reported a patient who presented at the age of 33 years and cited even older ages at presentation, namely 62 years (Fallon et al., 1989) and 69 years (Murphy et al., 1985). |Whereas most EPP patients experience only a painful photosensitivity, a small number develop liver complications, including fatal liver damage, due to the accumulation of excessive amounts of protoporphyrin in the liver (Bloomer et al., 1975; Cripps et al., 1977; Bloomer, 1979). Gallstones pigmented with protoporphyrin have been reported. Both of the British patients of Magnus et al. (1961) and one of the patients of Haeger-Aronsen (1963) were operated on for gallstones at a relatively young age. |
145500::variations in many genes contribute to essential hypertension. For information on genetic heterogeneity of essential hypertension, see the MAPPING section.|The Pickering school held that blood pressure has a continuous distribution, that multiple genes and multiple environmental factors determine the level of one's blood pressure just as the determination of stature and intelligence is multifactorial, and that 'essential hypertension' is merely the upper end of the distribution (Pickering, 1978). In this view the person with essential hypertension is one who happens to inherit an aggregate of genes determining hypertension (and also is exposed to exogenous factors that favor hypertension). The Platt school took the view that essential hypertension is a simple mendelian dominant trait (Platt, 1963). McDonough et al. (1964) defended the monogenic idea. See McKusick (1960) and Kurtz and Spence (1993) for reviews. Swales (1985) reviewed the Platt-Pickering controversy as an 'episode in recent medical history.' The Pickering point of view appears to be more consistent with the observations. |Ravogli et al. (1990) measured blood pressure in 15 normotensive subjects whose parents were both hypertensive (FH+/+), 15 normotensive subjects with 1 hypertensive parent (FH +/-), and 15 normotensive subjects whose parents were not hypertensive (FH -/-); among the 3 groups, subjects were matched for age, sex, and body mass index. The measurements were made in the office during a variety of laboratory stressors and during a prolonged rest period, and ambulatory blood pressure monitoring was done for a 24-hour period. Office blood pressure was higher in the FH +/+ group than in the FH -/- group. The pressor responses were similar in the 2 groups, but the FH +/+ group had higher prolonged 24-hour blood pressure than the FH -/- group; the differences were always significant at the 5% level for systolic blood pressure. The FH +/+ group also had a greater left ventricular mass index by echocardiography than the FH -/- group. The blood pressure values and echocardiographic values of the FH +/- group tended to lie between those of the other 2 groups. Thus, the higher blood pressure shown by individuals in the prehypertensive stage with a family history of parental hypertension does not reflect a hyperreactivity to stress but an early permanent blood pressure elevation. See comments by Pickering (1990), the son of the early defender of the multifactorial hypothesis. |In a comparison of normotensive subjects who had either hypertensive or normotensive parents, van Hooft et al. (1991) found that the mean renal blood flow was lower in subjects with 2 hypertensive parents than in those with 2 normotensive parents. Moreover, both the filtration fraction and renal vascular resistance were higher in the subjects with 2 hypertensive parents. The subjects with 2 hypertensive parents had lower plasma concentrations of renin (179820) and aldosterone than those with 2 normotensive parents. The values in subjects with one hypertensive and one normotensive parent fell between those for the other 2 groups. The conclusion of van Hooft et al. (1991) was that alterations in renal hemodynamics occur at an early stage in the development of familial hypertension. |Examination of the biochemical processes that effect blood pressure homeostasis should elucidate some of the interactive physiologic regulators that malfunction in persons with elevated pressure and show whether single genes of large effect are important in some. For example, the electrochemical gradients of cations across erythrocyte membranes are maintained by at least 7 pathways. Garay and Meyer (1979) demonstrated an abnormally low ratio of Na+ to K+ net fluxes in sodium-loading and potassium-depleted erythrocytes of human essential hypertension. This finding was absent in normotensive families and in secondary hypertension, but present in some young normotensive children of hypertensive parents. |Garay et al. (1980) found that erythrocytes have a Na, K-cotransport system (independent of the pump) that extrudes both internal Na and K and is functionally deficient in red cells of persons with essential hypertension and some of their descendants, with or without hypertension. Parfrey et al. (1981) showed that whereas young adults with a familial predisposition to hypertension behave similarly to those without such a predisposition in having a pressor response to a high sodium intake, they are peculiar in showing a depressor response to a high potassium intake. Garay (1981) found a defect in the furosemide-sensitive Na-K cotransfer mechanism in red cells of patients with essential hypertension and in some of their normotensive relatives. The same defect is found in strains of experimental animals bred for susceptibility to salt-induced hypertension or spontaneous hypertension. |Etkin et al. (1982) assessed red cell sodium transport simply by measuring the unidirectional passive influx of sodium-22 into ouabain-treated erythrocytes. In American blacks with essential hypertension, this approach failed to show the abnormal erythrocyte sodium transport that is characteristic of white persons with essential hypertension. Thus, among American blacks, essential hypertension may have a different genetic basis. De Wardener and MacGregor (1982) reviewed evidence for the hypothesis that 'the underlying genetic lesion is a renal difficulty in excreting sodium,' which sets in train a rise in the circulating concentration of a sodium-transport inhibitor. |Canessa et al. (1980) found ouabain-insensitive erythrocyte sodium-lithium countertransport (SLC) to be at least 2-fold elevated in patients. Woods et al. (1982) confirmed these results and further showed that normotensive sons of patients had significantly higher rates of countertransport than sons of normotensive controls. In patients with a positive family history, Clegg et al. (1982) found raised lithium efflux in 76% and raised red cell sodium content in 36%. Heagerty et al. (1982) measured sodium efflux rates in leukocytes in 18 normotensive subjects who had one or more first-degree relatives with essential hypertension. The total efflux rate constant was significantly lower, owing to reduced ouabain-sensitive sodium pump activity. |Woods et al. (1983) demonstrated that the rate of sodium-lithium countertransport may not be a wholly intrinsic feature of the red cell; a dialyzable plasma factor could be demonstrated. In a study of white males, Weder (1986) found that lithium clearance, a measure of proximal tubular reabsorption of sodium, was reduced and red-cell lithium-sodium countertransport was increased in hypertensives as compared with normals. Within the group of normotensive controls, lithium clearance was lower in those with at least 1 first-degree relative with hypertension than in those with no hypertensive relative. Weder (1986) concluded that enhanced proximal tubular sodium reabsorption may precede the development of essential hypertension. |Kagamimori et al. (1985) found a significant correlation in lithium-sodium countertransport and sodium-potassium cotransport rates in red blood cells in parent-offspring pairs (r = 0.52, p less than 0.01, and r = 0.46, p less than 0.01, respectively) but not in husband-wife pairs. Sodium pump rates, on the other hand, were significantly correlated in both pairs. This led them to conclude that sodium pump has a substantial environmental component whereas the genetic component predominates in the other functions. This conclusion was supported by the fact that sodium pump rates correlated significantly with sodium/creatinine and sodium/potassium ratios in casual urine. Hasstedt et al. (1988) presented evidence supporting the possibility that an allele at a major locus elevates the rate of sodium-lithium countertransport. Rebbeck et al. (1991) found evidence of both environmental and genetic factors in the determination of sodium-lithium countertransport. |Parmer et al. (1992) assessed baroreflex sensitivity in hypertensives with or without a positive family history of hypertension and in normotensives with or without a positive family history. This was done by recording cardiac slowing in response to acute phenylephrine-induced hypertension and cardiac acceleration in response to amyl nitrite-induced fall in blood pressure. Of all variables investigated, family history of hypertension was the strongest unique predictor of baroreflex sensitivity. Parmer et al. (1992) suggested that impairment in baroreflex sensitivity in hypertension is in part genetically determined and may be an important hereditary component in the pathogenesis of essential hypertension. |Low birth weight is associated with the subsequent development of hypertension in adult life. Maternal malnutrition has been suggested as the cause. Edwards et al. (1993) suggested an alternative etiology, namely, increased fetal exposure to maternal glucocorticoids. Benediktsson et al. (1993) pointed out that hypertension is strongly predicted by the combination of low birth weight and a large placenta. Normally, fetal protection is afforded by placental 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (218030), which converts physiologic glucocorticoids to inactive products. |Siffert et al. (1995) and Pietruck et al. (1996) demonstrated an enhanced signal transduction via pertussis toxin-sensitive G proteins in lymphoblasts and fibroblasts from selected patients with essential hypertension. |Noon et al. (1997) studied 105 men, aged 23 to 33 years, drawn at random from the population studied by Medical Research Council Working Party (1985). In hypertensive subjects with hypertensive parents, Noon et al. (1997) reported impaired dermal vasodilatation and fewer capillaries on the dorsum of the finger, as compared to these factors in hypertensive subjects with hypotensive parents or hypotensive subjects with either hypo- or hypertensive parents. No differences in other hemodynamic indices were seen among the groups. Noon et al. (1997) suggested that defective angiogenesis may be an etiological component in the inheritance of hypertension. |Salt-Sensitive Essential Hypertension|Several varieties of familial, salt-sensitive, low-renin hypertension with a proven or presumptive genetic basis have been described (Gordon, 1995). The conditions in which the molecular basis of the disorder has been identified at the DNA level include 2 forms of Liddle syndrome (177200) due to mutation in the beta subunit (600760.0001) or gamma subunit (600761.0001) of the amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium channel; the syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess (AME) due to a defect in the renal form of 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (218030); and the form of familial hyperaldosteronism which is successfully treated with low doses of glucocorticoids, such as dexamethasone ('glucocorticoid-remediable aldosteronism'), which is due to a Lapore hemoglobin-like fusion of the contiguous CYP11B1 (610613) and CYP11B2 (124080) genes. |In studies in rats, Machnik et al. (2009) demonstrated that TONEBP (604708)-VEGFC (601528) signaling in mononuclear phagocytes is a major determinant of extracellular volume and blood pressure homeostasis, and that VEGFC is an osmosensitive, hypertonicity-driven gene intimately involved in salt-induced hypertension. |Lifton (1996) reviewed the molecular genetics of human blood pressure variation. He pointed out that at least 10 genes have been shown to alter blood pressure; most of these are rare mutations imparting large quantitative effects that either raise or lower blood pressure. These mutations alter blood pressure through a common pathway, changing salt and water reabsorption in the kidney. Disorders that fall into this category include glucocorticoid remediable aldosteronism (103900), the syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess (218030), and Liddle syndrome (177200), which is known to be caused by a mutation in either the beta subunit or the gamma subunit of the renal epithelial sodium channel. Unlike the preceding conditions, hypotension characterizes the following mendelian disorders: pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (264350), which can be produced by mutation in either the alpha subunit (600228) or the beta subunit (600760) of the same epithelial sodium channel involved in Liddle syndrome; and Gitelman syndrome (263800), which is caused by mutations in the thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransporter (600968). |Lifton et al. (2001) reviewed rare syndromic forms of hyper- and hypotension showing mendelian inheritance, for some of which the underlying mutations have been identified by positional cloning and candidate gene analyses. These genes all regulate renal salt reabsorption, in accordance with the work of Guyton (1991) and others that established that the kidney plays a central role in blood pressure regulation. |
602473::ethylmalonic encephalopathy (EE) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ETHE1 gene (608451), which encodes a mitochondrial matrix protein, on chromosome 19q13.|Ethylmalonic encephalopathy is an autosomal recessive severe metabolic disorder of infancy affecting the brain, gastrointestinal tract, and peripheral vessels. The disorder is characterized by neurodevelopmental delay and regression, prominent pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs, recurrent petechiae, orthostatic acrocyanosis, and chronic diarrhea. Brain MRI shows necrotic lesions in deep gray matter structures. Death usually occurs in the first decade of life (summary by Drousiotou et al., 2011). |Burlina et al. (1991) first described ethylmalonic encephalopathy as a syndrome characterized by developmental delay, acrocyanosis, petechiae, and chronic diarrhea. Laboratory studies showed ethylmalonic and methylsuccinic aciduria and lactic acidemia. However, in vitro activities of short chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCAD; 606885) and 2-methyl-branched chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, 2 enzymes whose deficiencies could theoretically produce the biochemical findings observed in ethylmalonic encephalopathy, were found to be normal (Burlina et al., 1994). |Nowaczyk et al. (1998) reported the cases of 2 sibs with ethylmalonic encephalopathy and central nervous system malformations. The girl had primary tethered cord. Her younger brother, who was evaluated at the age of 4 years because of a similar phenotype (episodic ataxia, chronic diarrhea, and acrocyanosis), had cerebellar tonsillar ectopia (Chiari I malformation). |Tiranti et al. (2004) stated that since the initial report no more than 30 cases of ethylmalonic encephalopathy had been described worldwide, leading to the assumption that the disorder is very rare. However, the actual incidence of the condition may be significantly underestimated because the biochemical phenotype may be incorrectly attributed to other metabolic disorders. |Drousiotou et al. (2011) reported 3 patients from 2 unrelated families of Greek Cypriot origin with ethylmalonic encephalopathy. The first patient presented at age 2.5 months with feeding difficulties, failure to thrive, petechiae, and ecchymosis. She was floppy with severe head lag and microcephaly, and showed poor responses to auditory and visual stimuli. Deep tendon reflexes were exaggerated, and there was sustained clonus and bilateral Babinski sign. She subsequently developed chronic diarrhea and seizures. Brain MRI revealed multiple bilateral loci of high intensity in the basal ganglia on T2-weighted images. She showed neurologic regression and was 5.5 years old at the time of the report. Her older brother died at age 6 months of a presumably similar disorder. Ultrasound of the brain showed hyperechogenicity of gyri and sulci. No tissues were available for confirmation of diagnosis. A girl from a second family was born prematurely at 36 weeks' gestation and presented at age 6 months with feeding difficulties, hypotonia, and global developmental delay. She later developed diarrhea, petechiae, ecchymosis, and seizures, and brain MRI showed abnormal signals in the basal ganglia and thinning of the corpus callosum. She died at age 8 months from cardiopulmonary arrest. Laboratory studies of all 3 patients showed increased serum lactate and butyrylcarnitine, and increased urinary ethylmalonic acid, methylsuccinate, and thiosulfate. Western blot analysis from 2 patients showed complete absence of the ETHE1 protein. |
301500::Fabry disease is caused by mutations in the GLA gene (300644), encoding alpha-galactosidase A, on chromosome Xq22. A cardiac variant of Fabry disease is also caused by mutation in the GLA gene.|Fabry disease is an X-linked inborn error of glycosphingolipid catabolism resulting from deficient or absent activity of the lysosomal enzyme alpha-galactosidase A. This enzymatic defect leads to the systemic accumulation of globotriaoslyceramide (Gb3) and related glycosphingolipids in the plasma and cellular lysosomes of vessels, nerves, tissues, and organs throughout the body (Nance et al., 2006). The disorder is a systemic disease, manifest as progressive renal failure, cardiac disease, cerebrovascular disease, small-fiber peripheral neuropathy, and skin lesions, among other abnormalities (Schiffmann, 2009). |An atypical variant of Fabry disease has been reported in which cardiac disease, specifically left ventricular hypertrophy, with or without renal failure, develops in the sixth decade of life. These patients have residual GLA activity (Nakao et al., 1995; Nakao et al., 2003). |Although Fabry disease was previously considered to be an X-linked recessive disorder, Wang et al. (2007) found that heterozygous women with Fabry disease experience significant life-threatening conditions requiring medical treatment and intervention. Thus, heterozygous Fabry women should not be called carriers, as this term underestimates the seriousness of the disease in these patients. |Clarke (2007) and Schiffmann (2009) provided detailed reviews of Fabry disease. |In his first paper on this subject, Fabry (1898) called the skin lesions 'purpura papulosa haemorrhagica Hebrae,' suggesting that they had previously been described by Hebra, the famous Austrian dermatologist. Affected individuals had painful crises in the extremities, thought to result from lipid changes in ganglion cells of the autonomic nervous system. Attacks of pain in the abdomen may have been misdiagnosed as appendicitis or other surgical emergencies. Vascular lesions of lipid nature occurred at other sites such as the ocular fundi and kidney. Renal failure was the usual cause of death.|Hamburger et al. (1964) described a familial nephropathy, manifested clinically by proteinuria and renal insufficiency. Renal biopsy showed that the epithelial cells of the glomerular tufts and to a lesser extent the tubular epithelial cells, glomerular endocapillary cells and arteriolar muscular cells were severely deformed with a large amount of cytoplasmic inclusion material appearing lipoid in nature. The mother's father died of uremia. |Skin lesion may be lacking even in patients with severe visceral manifestations (Johnston, 1967). Furthermore, identical angiokeratoma skin lesions occur in other lysosomal disorders: (see, e.g., Patel et al., 1972 and Loonen et al., 1974). Flynn et al. (1972) described a family without skin lesions. One affected male had severe enteropathy. |Franceschetti et al. (1969) reexamined a family with 'cornea verticillata' reported by Gruber (1946) and showed that Fabry disease was responsible for the corneal change. The extent of involvement of the cornea was about the same in males and females, thus allowing affected females to be identified. The corneal condition was formerly called Fleischer vortex dystrophy, or whorl-like corneal dystrophy. Stark (1999) noted that the antimalarial drug atabrine and the antiarrhythmic drug amiodarone can also cause these changes. |Mastropasqua et al. (2006) found that although Fabry disease-related corneal verticillata attributable to glycosphingolipid accumulation was considered to be primarily a corneal disease, in vivo confocal microscopy demonstrated structural alterations throughout the entire ocular surface epithelia. Different types of corneal epithelial lesions were observed in hemizygous and heterozygous patients.|In a period of a few months at a Montreal hospital, Clarke et al. (1971) saw 2 men with Fabry disease with clear corneas and without skin lesions, suggesting that it may be a more frequent cause of proteinuria or renal failure than realized. Romeo et al. (1972) studied one of Clarke's cases and concluded that enzymatically there were differences from the classic cases. A difference from the usual form of Fabry disease is suggested by the fact that leukocyte alpha-galactosidase deficiency was only partial rather than complete (Kint, 1970). |Halsted and Rowe (1975) described a 59-year-old man with Fabry disease. In addition to his unusually advanced age, he had celiac sprue (212750), which may have been related to the presence of the HLA-8 antigen. |Senechal and Germain (2003) reviewed the functional and anatomical cardiac manifestations in 20 hemizygous male patients with Fabry disease. Left ventricular hypertrophy and/or concentric remodeling were found in 60% of cases; structural changes in mitral and aortic valves in 25% and 10%, respectively; and short PR interval in 40%. |Rolfs et al. (2005) found that 21 (4.9%) of 342 males and 7 (2.4%) of 289 females with cryptogenic stroke had biologically significant mutations in the GLA gene. The mean age at onset of symptomatic cerebrovascular disease was 38.4 and 40.3 years in the men and women, respectively. Approximately 30% had classic manifestations of Fabry disease. Due to the high frequency of Fabry disease (4%, 28 of 721) in this cohort of stroke patients with cryptogenic stroke aged between 18 and 55 years, Rolfs et al. (2005) suggested that Fabry disease should be considered in young patients with unexplained stroke. |Nance et al. (2006) reported a 34-year-old man who presented with chronic exercise-induced pain, cramps, and fasciculations of the legs and feet. His mother was similarly affected. Alpha-glucosidase activity was 8.8% and 13.4% of normal, respectively. |Moore et al. (2007) provided a review of the cerebral vasculopathy in Fabry disease. Patients presented more commonly with radiologic findings consistent with small-vessel disease rather than large-vessel disease, although both may occur. The posterior circulation was more commonly affected. The pathomechanism is believed to result from a combination of abnormalities of the vessel wall, blood components, such as pro- and anti-coagulants, and abnormal hemodynamics or blood flow. Schiffmann (2009) noted that patients with Fabry disease have a 20-fold increased risk of ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attacks compared to the general population. |To evaluate life expectancy and cause of death among patients with Fabry disease, Waldek et al. (2009) examined data from 2,848 patients in the Fabry Registry. Life expectancy at birth was compared with that of the United States general population. As of August 2008, 75 of 1,422 males and 12 of 1,426 females in the Fabry Registry were reported to have died. The 87 deceased patients were diagnosed at a much older age than other patients in the Fabry Registry: median age at diagnosis was 40 versus 24 years in males and 55 versus 33 years in females. Life expectancy of males with Fabry disease was 58.2 years, compared with 74.7 years in the general population of the United States. The life expectancy of females with Fabry disease was 75.4 years, compared with 80.0 years in the United States general population. The most common cause of death among both genders was cardiovascular disease. Most (57%) patients who died of cardiovascular disease had previously received renal replacement therapy. Waldek et al. (2009) concluded that most deceased Fabry Registry patients exhibited serious cardiac and renal dysfunction, and that late diagnosis may have contributed to the early deaths of these patients. |Testai and Gorelick (2010) reviewed the pathophysiology of stroke in patients with Fabry disease. Population studies had estimated that Fabry disease is responsible for 1.2% of cryptogenic strokes in patients younger than 55 years, and women are more likely to be affected than men (27% vs 12%). Stroke may result from both cardiac (hypertrophy, arrhythmia) or vascular (stenosis, vessel occlusion, vessel dilation) factors. The posterior circulation is most commonly affected. Brain imaging may show progressive white matter lesions. |The observations of Ogawa et al. (1990), Elleder et al. (1990), Nagao et al. (1991), and von Scheidt et al. (1991) indicated that manifestations of Fabry disease can be limited to the heart. These authors suggested that Fabry disease should be considered in patients who have cardiac symptoms, such as angina, exercise intolerance, and electrocardiographic changes, but normal coronary arteries, heart size, and hemodynamic findings. Cases of Fabry disease limited to the cardiac manifestation may be identified by ultrastructural examination of endomyocardial biopsy specimens or, less invasively, by determining the plasma GLA activity in male patients with unexplained cardiac symptoms. The oldest of the patients reported with this form of the disease was a Japanese patient who died at the age of 71 years (Ogawa et al., 1990). Nagao et al. (1991) reported 2 unrelated males who developed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy after the age of 50 as their first manifestation of Fabry disease. |Von Scheidt et al. (1991) reported a 54-year-old man with the cardiac variant of Fabry disease confirmed by genetic analysis (M296V; 300644.0005). The patient had 'crescendo angina,' relieved by nitroglycerin, as well as electrocardiographic changes, but normal cardiac chamber size and normal systolic and diastolic function by echocardiogram. Cardiac catheterization showed no stenoses of the extramural coronary arteries. Diagnosis of Fabry disease was made by endomyocardial biopsy. Light-microscopic examination showed that approximately half the myocytes contained a centrally stored foamy material that stained metachromatically. By electron microscopy, typical myelin-figure-like concentric lamellar inclusions in lysosomes were observed. Most remarkably, the endothelial cells of the myocardial capillaries were not involved and no changes were observed in specimens of skeletal muscle, liver, rectum, and skin, including small blood vessels and nerves. |Nakao et al. (1995) found that 7 of 230 unrelated Japanese men with left ventricular hypertrophy had the atypical variant of Fabry disease. These 7 unrelated men, ranging in age from 55 to 72 years, did not have angiokeratoma, acroparesthesias, hypohidrosis, or corneal opacities. Endomyocardial biopsy revealed marked sarcoplasmic vacuolization in all 5 patients examined. Electron microscopy, performed on tissues from 4 of these patients, revealed typical lysosomal inclusions with a concentric lamellar configuration. Two patients had novel missense mutations in the GLA gene (300644.0051; 300644.0052). The remaining 5 patients had no mutations in the coding region of the GLA gene; however, in addition to low plasma alpha-galactosidase activity, GLA mRNA was markedly lower than normal. |Romeo and Migeon (1970) reported genetic inactivation of the alpha-galactosidase locus in females patients with Fabry disease, consistent with lyonization. |Mutoh et al. (1988) described an unusual degree of autonomic dysfunction, manifested by severe orthostatic hypotension, in a 21-year-old female patient. |Hillsley et al. (1995) described a 74-year-old woman with restrictive cardiomyopathy complicating conventional coronary artery disease that had been treated with angioplasty and with coronary artery bypass grafting. |MacDermot et al. (2001) reported clinical manifestations and impact of disease in 60 females with Fabry disease. The median cumulative survival was 70 years, representing an approximate reduction of 15 years from the general population. Six of 32 women had renal failure, 9 of 32 (28%) died of cerebrovascular complications, and 42 (70%) had experienced neuropathic pain. Twenty (30%) female patients had some serious or debilitating manifestation of Fabry disease. |Whybra et al. (2001) performed a comprehensive clinical evaluation on 20 females with Fabry disease. In addition to skin manifestations, various other clinical manifestations of the disease were present, including acroparesthesia, kidney dysfunction, cerebrovascular disease, and gastrointestinal and heart problems. |Pruss et al. (2006) reported a 50-year-old woman who presented with a 10-year history of paroxysmal rotational vertigo without hearing loss or tinnitus. Brain MRI revealed megadolichobasilar artery and white matter lesions. Due to a positive family history of Fabry disease, molecular analysis was performed, and a mutation was found in the GLA gene. She displayed cornea verticillata but neither angiokeratoma nor acroparesthesia. Pruss et al. (2006) postulated that the vertigo resulted from megadolichobasilar compression of the vestibulocochlear nerve. |Kim et al. (2007) reported a 38-year-old woman with Fabry disease who had acroparesthesias and anhidrosis since adolescence. She later developed gastrointestinal bloating and interstitial lung disease with progressive dyspnea requiring supplemental oxygen at all times. High-resolution CT scans showed regions of both abnormally dense and lucent lung parenchyma, reflecting a combination of ground-glass opacity and air trapping, most conspicuous in the upper lobes. There was also evidence of pulmonary hypertension. Skin examination showed cutaneous angiokeratomas and digital clubbing. Treatment with enzyme replacement therapy resulted in significant pulmonary and gastrointestinal improvement within several months. |In a review of the medical records of 44 heterozygous female patients with Fabry disease, Wang et al. (2007) concluded that female Fabry patients experience significant multisystemic disease and reduced quality of life. Acroparesthesias were the first reported symptom in 76%; most reported the first symptoms during the first 2 decades of life. Clinical features and findings included fatigue, exercise intolerance, stroke, obstructive pulmonary disease, angina, renal disease, gastrointestinal complaints, and decreased vibration sense. Eleven patients were treated with enzyme replacement therapy. Wang et al. (2007) suggested that Fabry disease should not be considered an X-linked recessive disorder and that heterozygous Fabry women should not be called carriers because they experience significant life-threatening conditions requiring medical treatment and intervention. |
249100::familial Mediterranean fever is caused by mutation in the pyrin gene (MEFV; 608107).|Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by recurrent attacks of fever and inflammation in the peritoneum, synovium, or pleura, accompanied by pain. Amyloidosis with renal failure is a complication and may develop without overt crises (French FMF Consortium, 1997). See also autosomal dominant FMF (134610), which is caused by heterozygous mutation in the MEFV gene.|Siegal (1945) reported 'benign paroxysmal peritonitis.' Under the term 'periodic peritonitis,' Reimann et al. (1954) described 72 cases from Lebanon, most of them Armenian. In 1 remarkable family, survivors of the siege of Musa Dagh, 20 affected persons occurred in 5 generations, with 3 instances of skips in the pedigree. The high gene frequency and small breeding group could account for the findings as representing pseudodominant inheritance. Sokmen (1959) noted that many cases of FMF in Turkey were observed in persons without known Armenian ancestry. This condition was called 'familial paroxysmal polyserositis' by Siegal (1964), who was the first to delineate the disorder clearly in the United States and who observed rather numerous cases in Ashkenazim. Barakat et al. (1986) referred to FMF as 'recurrent hereditary polyserositis.' |Armenian (1983) compared the characteristics of 79 patients seen for the first time in a special clinic for FMF in its first 16 months of operation with the characteristics of 79 patients who presented during the last 6 years of its operation. The patients studied during the first period had a more severe form of the disease with multiple clinical manifestations such as proteinuria and amyloidosis. There were more males and more patients with a positive family history in the earlier group. Armenian (1983) emphasized the importance of a population base and 'enrollment bias'--differences in referral pattern, in case selection, and in the sources of data--in accounting for significant variation in the frequency of various clinical manifestations in published series of FMF cases. |In a study of FMF in Kuwait, Barakat et al. (1986) reported on an 11-year experience with 175 Arab patients. The most common manifestation was peritonitis (94%), followed by arthritis (34%) and pleurisy (32%). Amyloidosis, rashes, hepatosplenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy were rare. |Mollaret (1944) described a syndrome of benign, recurrent meningitis with a characteristic spinal fluid picture: pleocytosis of mixed cellular type including endothelial cells (Mollaret cells) during the attack, in the absence of any positive agent. These attacks were separated by symptom-free periods lasting from days to years. Recovery was complete, with no neurologic deficit. Barakat et al. (1988) concluded that Mollaret meningitis is a feature of FMF. Schwabe and Monroe (1988) described a 32-year-old non-Ashkenazi Jewish man in whom meningitis first developed in Morocco at the age of 1 year. Between the ages of 26 and 31 years, he had 6 attacks of fever, frontal headache, nausea, and stiff neck, with positive Kernig and Brudzinski signs. In Saudi Arabia, Majeed and Barakat (1989) found that 48 of 88 affected children had onset before the age of 5 years. |In a 60-year-old Arab man with FMF, Agmon et al. (1984) observed selective amyloid involvement of the zona glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex resulting in isolated hypoaldosteronism. As a rule, the glomerulosa is spared in adrenal amyloidosis of FMF. Knecht et al. (1985) found abnormally high levels of serum amyloid A (SAA; 104750) in attack-free intervals and very high levels at the onset of attacks. Although there is a striking difference in the frequency of amyloid nephropathy in different ethnic groups with FMF, the elevation of SAA during and between attacks is the same, and interethnic marriages produce affected progeny (Pras et al., 1982). |Rawashdeh and Majeed (1996) reviewed findings from the FMF pediatric patient population in northern Jordan (all children were of Jordanian, Palestinian, or Syrian origin). The 192 patients first presented between the age of 4 months and 16 years. The mean delay in diagnosis was 3.7 years and was increased for children who presented before the age of 2 years. Abdominal pain was the most common presenting symptom and occurred in 51%, while arthritis and pleuritis occurred in 26% and 23%, respectively. The investigators noted that family history was positive in 62% of the children, which was not surprising in this autosomal recessive disorder given the 64% consanguinity rate in northern Jordan. Minimum prevalence was given as 1 in 2,600 with an estimated gene frequency in the childhood population of 1 in 50 (calculated on the numbers of diagnosed patients). The authors warned that the frequency of FMF among Jordanian Arab children was greater than previously estimated. |Eshel et al. (1988) suggested that acute, unilateral, short-term orchitis is a feature of FMF; they observed 20 episodes in 13 patients. Ozyilkan et al. (1994) suggested that bronchial asthma is abnormally infrequent in FMF patients. This was the case not only in patients on colchicine because an absence of a history of asthma before the diagnosis of FMF was also found. |In Ankara, Turkey, Saatci et al. (1997) analyzed 425 FMF patients without and 180 with amyloidosis. Of the latter group, 103 had amyloidosis type I and 57 had amyloidosis type II. Type I amyloidosis was defined as amyloidosis developing subsequent to clinical features of FMF, whereas type II was defined as amyloidosis developing as the initial manifestation. The male-to-female ratio was higher in the amyloidosis population (111 to 69) than it was in the FMF population without amyloidosis (225 to 200) (P = 0.048). The consanguinity rate was the same in the 2 groups. A family history of amyloidosis was significantly more frequent in the amyloidosis group (P = 0.0001). The combination of positive family history of amyloidosis and consanguinity increased the risk of amyloidosis more than 6 fold. The 5-year chronic renal failure-free survival was 43.1% and 18.7% in type I and type II amyloidosis, respectively. Saatci et al. (1997) found 10 cases of Henoch-Schonlein purpura and 9 of polyarteritis nodosa among their patients. The significance of the association between FMF and vasculitis was unclear. Among 435 FMF patients treated with colchicine, only 10 (2.3%) developed amyloidosis, thus confirming that this drug protects patients from the complication. |In a retrospective study of 4,000 FMF patients, using a computer chart review, Kees et al. (1997) found that during a 20-year period, one or more episodes of pericarditis were recorded in 27 patients. Each patient experienced 1 to 3 pericarditis attacks, lasting a mean of 4.2 days, accompanied by elevated temperature and symptoms of FMF attack at another site. The pericarditis resolved spontaneously and left no sequelae. |Commenting on a paper by Yazigi and Abou-Charaf (1998), Tutar et al. (1999) noted that recurrent pericarditis can be the initial sole manifestation of FMF and suggested that mutation analysis for FMF be considered in patients with idiopathic recurrent pericarditis, especially if they are of Mediterranean origin. |Pras et al. (1998) compared the clinical features of FMF in North African Jews and Iraqi Jews, the 2 largest population groups suffering from the disease in Israel. North African Jews were found to have more severe disease manifested by earlier age of onset, increase in frequency and severity of joint involvement, higher incidence of erysipelas-like erythema, and higher dose of colchicine required to control symptoms. |Cattan et al. (2000) studied the incidence of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD; 266600) in non-Ashkenazi Jewish patients with FMF. Cattan et al. (2000) estimated a prevalence of at least 3 per 300 (or 3 per 173 if the calculation is done through probands) in non-Ashkenazi Jews with FMF. They postulated that the inflammatory processes of FMF and IBD are additive, resulting in increased severity of disease in the new patients. |Tamir et al. (1999) characterized a late-onset form of FMF with distinct clinical, demographic, and molecular genetic characteristics. This subset of patients experienced their first FMF attack at age 40 years or later. The comparison group consisted of 40 consecutive FMF patients who arrived at the FMF clinic for their regular follow-up visit and were 40 years of age or older at the time of examination. Only 20 of 4,000 (0.5%) patients had late-onset FMF. These patients were mostly men, of non-North African origin (P less than 0.05 compared to controls). All had abdominal attacks and in most these were the only manifestation of their disease (P less than 0.001). None had chronic or prolonged manifestations of FMF such as amyloidosis, chronic arthritis, or protracted myalgia (P less than 0.001). The response to treatment was good despite using low colchicine dosage (P less than 0.05). The overall severity score indicated a mild disease (P less than 0.001). Mutation analysis revealed absence of M694V homozygosity (P less than 0.01), compared to the regular FMF population. Tamir et al. (1999) concluded that the onset of FMF at a late age defines a milder form of disease with typical clinical, demographic, and molecular genetic characteristics. |
608600::Familial partial lipodystrophy type 1 (FPLD1), or Kobberling-type lipodystrophy, is characterized by loss of adipose tissue confined to the extremities, with normal or increased distribution of fat on the face, neck, and trunk (Kobberling and Dunnigan, 1986). For a general description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of familial partial lipodystrophy (FPLD), see 151660.|Kobberling et al. (1975) reported a woman with complete absence of subcutaneous fat on the arms and legs, well-developed adipose tissue on the trunk and face, severe hyperlipidemia, eruptive xanthomas, insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus with lack of ketoacidosis, hepatomegaly, and increased basal metabolic rate. The patient's mother and sister had the same peculiar appearance and slight hyperlipidemia, but no diabetes mellitus. The authors suggested autosomal dominant inheritance. |Johansen et al. (1995) reported a mother and daughter with atrophy of fat in the face, chest, and limbs, and abdominal obesity caused by intraabdominal fat accumulation. The mother had severe insulin resistance and impaired glucose tolerance, whereas the daughter did not. Both had metabolic rates about 30% above normal levels. |Herbst et al. (2003) reported 13 patients with FPLD1. All lacked subcutaneous fat in the extremities and gluteal region, but had normal or increased truncal fat. There was normal or increased fat in the face and around the neck. All patients except 1 reported that their body habitus was present in childhood. Other features included hypertension, coronary artery disease, and diabetes. Laboratory studies showed increased total cholesterol, decreased high density lipoprotein, increased triglycerides, and hyperglycemia. Acanthosis nigricans was present in 1 patient with diabetes. None of the patients had polycystic ovary syndrome. Herbst et al. (2003) noted that only women have been reported with FPLD1. None of the patients had mutations in the LMNA (150330) or PPARG (601487) genes. |
227810::Fanconi-Bickel syndrome is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the GLUT2 gene (138160) on chromosome 3q26.|Fanconi-Bickel syndrome is a rare but well-defined clinical entity, inherited in an autosomal recessive mode and characterized by hepatorenal glycogen accumulation, proximal renal tubular dysfunction, and impaired utilization of glucose and galactose (Manz et al., 1987). Because no underlying enzymatic defect in carbohydrate metabolism had been identified and because metabolism of both glucose and galactose is impaired, a primary defect of monosaccharide transport across the membranes had been suggested (Berry et al., 1995; Fellers et al., 1967; Manz et al., 1987; Odievre, 1966). |Use of the term glycogenosis type XI introduced by Hug (1987) is to be discouraged because glycogen accumulation is not due to the proposed functional defect of phosphoglucomutase, an essential enzyme in the common degradative pathways of both glycogen and galactose, but is secondary to nonfunctional glucose transport.|Fanconi and Bickel (1949) described what they believed to be the first combination of tubular nephropathy and glycogen storage disease in a boy born to consanguineous parents living in a remote valley in the southern Swiss Alps. Because of failure to thrive, polydipsia, and constipation at around the age of 6 months, the patient received vitamin D and calcium supplements. At ages 2.7 and 3.7 years he had short stature (-6 SD), a protuberant abdomen, hyperlordosis, excessive hepatomegaly, facial obesity, and generalized osteopenia but no frank rickets. Tubular nephropathy was characterized by excessive glucosuria (mean 10 to 30 g per day, up to 60 g), and moderate hyperphosphaturia in the presence of constant hypophosphatemia, hyperuricemia, hyperaminoaciduria, and intermittent albuminuria. Fanconi and Bickel (1949) observed hypoglycemia and ketonuria in the fasting state and hyperglycemia in the postabsorptive state. Sensitivity was increased to insulin and decreased to adrenaline. Liver biopsy revealed excessive amounts of glycogen with steatosis; hypercholesterolemia and hyperlipidemia were pronounced; no evidence of a secretory defect was present. Gitzelmann (1957) gave a follow-up of the patient reported by Fanconi and Bickel (1949) at age 12 years and described relative resistance to glucagon. At age 52, the patient still lived in the same village and was withdrawn, having spent his life as a shepherd (Steinmann, 1997). He had never had any medication and was consuming a great deal of milk. He was 140 cm in height with an arm span of 150 cm and a weight of 43 kg. His abdomen was moderately prominent, his liver 10 cm below the costal margin. There were no cataracts. Apart from arthrotic changes of the lower back and shoulders, he had no complaints. Blood and urine compounds were characteristic of FBS (Steinmann, 1997). |In a comprehensive review published in honor of Professor Bickel's 80th birthday, Santer et al. (1998) summarized the case of the original patient and presented his follow-up over more than 50 years. |Rotthauwe et al. (1963) described a 4.5-year-old girl with the typical clinical and chemical features of FBS, including fasting hypoglycemia, glucose and galactose intolerance, and partial resistance to adrenaline and glucagon. In the liver biopsy, Rotthauwe et al. (1963) found that glycogen content was increased to 11 g per 100 g wet weight (normal below 7); glycogen structure was normal, as were the enzyme activities of glucose-6-phosphatase, phosphorylase, and amylo-1,6-glucosidase; and free liver glucose was twice as high as that in rat liver, whereas the other glycolytic metabolites were comparable. Various enzymes and metabolites indicated regular function of glycolysis, hexose-monophosphate shunt, and Krebs cycle in the liver. At autopsy, Rotthauwe et al. (1963) noted liver and kidney weights of 1100 g and 100 g, respectively; the surface of the kidneys was smooth, and glycogen content was increased in the proximal renal tubules. |Odievre (1966) described 2 cases in 2 families with similar clinical and chemical findings as those reported by Fanconi and Bickel (1949). He noted fasting hypoglycemia, ketosis, and low blood lactate levels, and after glucose loads, prolonged hyperglycemia, only moderate insulin levels, and high blood lactate levels. After insulin administered subcutaneously or released by intravenous tolbutamide, glucose dropped to very low levels and blood lactate rose; Odievre (1966) concluded that lactic acid was produced by glycolysis of glucose that had been taken up by peripheral tissues rather than by the liver. After oral and intravenous galactose loads there were severe and long-lasting hypergalactosemias. Since after oral and intravenous fructose loads disappearance of this sugar was normal, Odievre (1966) concluded that only utilization of glucose and galactose were impaired. Liver and kidneys were enlarged, and biopsies disclosed excessive glycogen contents in these organs but normal activities of phosphorylase, glucose-6-phosphatase, and amylo-1,6-glucosidase in the liver. |Fellers et al. (1967) found in their patient that renal clearance of glucose was equal to or greater than the renal clearance of inulin, which suggested to them an undiscovered renal transport defect; the term pseudo-phlorizin was chosen to attach importance to a mechanism of glucose reabsorption or a defect in glucose transport.|Brivet et al. (1983) studied carbohydrate metabolism in a patient with FBS. [1-14C] galactose oxidation was normal in erythrocytes but reduced in fresh minced liver tissue. Data suggested to Brivet et al. (1983) an unidentified defect in galactose transport across the liver cells. |Manz et al. (1987) postulated a defect of the diffusion carrier facilitating the influx and efflux of glucose and galactose in the liver and the efflux of glucose and galactose at the basolateral membrane of the proximal tubule, which would lead to high intracellular glucose concentration, inhibition of glycogen degradation, and proximal tubular dysfunction. They also introduced the eponymic designation Fanconi-Bickel syndrome. |Manz et al. (1987) compared clinical, functional, and morphologic data from 9 infants, children, and adults with FBS observed from 2 to 25 years with those reported in the literature. The first symptoms were fever, vomiting, growth failure, and rickets at the age of 3 to 10 months. Later the patients presented with dwarfism, protuberant abdomen, hepatomegaly, moon-shaped face, and fat deposition about the shoulders and abdomen. Cutting of the teeth and puberty were retarded. Fractures and pancreatitis were complications. Rickets and osteoporosis later in life were constant features. Cataracts were not present. |As determined radiologically by Manz et al. (1987), kidney size and growth related to body height was increased in most patients. Glomerular filtration rate was normal or low normal, and there was no progression to glomerular insufficiency nor deterioration of tubular defects. Manz et al. (1987) observed that glucosuria was the most prominent finding (40 to 200 g per 1.73 m(2), with somewhat lower values during the first year of life), and the ratio of glucose clearance to inulin clearance ranged from 0.59 to 1.0, independent of the blood glucose levels. After an oral load of galactose, tubular reabsorption of galactose was 10% at a serum level of 105 mg/dl. Generalized hyperaminoaciduria, moderate hyperphosphaturia, hyperuricosuria, and hypercalciuria were constant findings, and mild proteinuria was exclusively of tubular origin. Renal bicarbonate threshold was decreased and led to moderate metabolic acidosis. Polyuria, probably due to osmotic diuresis, was a constant finding. Upon renal biopsy, Manz et al. (1987) found normal glomeruli, interstitium, and vessels. By electron microscopy, glycogen accumulation was marked in some but not all proximal tubular cells and seemed to predominate in the straight part of the proximal tubules, and megamitochondria were encountered in these cells. The brush border was normal. Manz et al. (1987) noted that at birth, the liver appeared normal or slightly increased in size in 2 cases, and became greatly enlarged during infancy when hepatomegaly was present in all patients. The liver size and glycogen content were reduced after the institution of an antiketogenic diet. Laboratory findings of Manz et al. (1987) included fasting hypoglycemia and ketonuria; hyperglycemia and hypergalactosemia in the postabsorptive state; hypercholesterolemia and hyperlipidemia; moderately elevated ALP; hypophosphatemia, hyperaminoaciduria, glucosuria, galactosuria, and proteinuria; normal enzymes of galactose and glycogen metabolism; normal fructose metabolism; and normal endocrinologic results. |Sanjad et al. (1993) reported large consanguineous family in which several individuals had the characteristic clinical features and laboratory findings of Fanconi-Bickel syndrome in association with markedly reduced liver phosphorylase kinase activity (PHK, see, e.g., 300798). This suggested that Fanconi-Bickel syndrome is genetically heterogeneous and that there may be another subtype of PHK deficiency (possibly associated with a distinctive genotype) that gives rise to hepatorenal glycogenosis. However, Burwinkel et al. (1999) showed that affected members of this family in fact had a homozygous mutation in the GLUT2 gene (P417L; 138160.0005). The affected proline residue is completely conserved in all mammalian glucose permease isoforms and even in bacterial sugar transporters and was believed to be critical for the passage of glucose through the permease. The low PHK activity was thought to be a secondary phenomenon that contributed to the deposition of glycogen in response to the intracellular glucose retention caused by GLUT2 deficiency. Nagai et al. (1988) had also described renal tubular acidosis in a 2.5-year-old Japanese boy with phosphorylase kinase deficiency. |In their 8-year-old patient, Berry et al. (1995) described renal glomerular hyperfiltration, microalbuminuria, and diffuse glomerular mesangial expansion resembling incipient diabetic nephropathy and similar to the changes observed in patients with glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency. Santer et al. (2002) demonstrated compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the GLUT2 gene (138160.0010 and 138160.0011) in this patient, thus indicating this was a bona fide case of Fanconi-Bickel syndrome and that renal hyperfiltration can be a feature of the disorder. Furthermore, phosphoglucomutase activity was not reduced in this patient, an important finding. |Aperia et al. (1981) described a boy and girl, offspring of first-cousin, Turkish-Assyrian parents, who showed poor appetite, slow weight gain, and retarded psychomotor development. Impairment of galactose metabolism was demonstrated by oral galactose load and by galactosemia when milk was given. As in classic galactosemia, Fanconi syndrome was present. However, galactose restriction did not restore renal tubular function or the children's general condition to normal. Galactokinase and galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase activities in red cells were normal. A generalized transport defect was suggested. Intestinal malabsorption was indicated by the general appearance (sparse subcutaneous fat, thin limbs, and distended abdomen) and the results of vitamin A and xylose absorption tests. Glucose absorption was normal, however. As the parents refused consent for biopsy, no morphologic studies of gut, liver, or kidney tissue were made. Santer et al. (2002) demonstrated that these sibs were homozygous for a splice site 1-bp insertion in the GLUT2 gene (138160.0009), thus indicating that they represented bona fide cases of FBS. Furthermore, the cases demonstrated that failure to thrive because of intestinal malabsorption can be a presenting sign of FBS in infancy and that hepatomegaly is not a 'conditio sine qua non' for the diagnosis of FBS. |Because of galactose intolerance, patients with FBS can be detected by neonatal screening for galactose; this was the case in 3 patients reported by Aperia et al. (1981), Manz et al. (1987), and Muller et al. (1997). Muller et al. (1997) noted that although FBS and galactosemia are clinically and enzymatically easy to distinguish, the 2 share some symptoms; clinicians should therefore be aware of this condition in cases of positive galactosemia screening. The paucity of FBS cases detected by neonatal galactose screening indicates that the disorder is extremely rare. |
604352::familial febrile seizures-4 (FEB4) is caused by a heterozygous mutation in the ADGRV1 gene (602851) on chromosome 5q14. One such family has been reported.For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of familial febrile seizures, see FEB1 (121210).|
229300::one form of Friedreich ataxia (FRDA1) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding frataxin (FXN; 606829), which has been mapped to chromosome 9q. The most common molecular abnormality is a GAA trinucleotide repeat expansion in intron 1 of the FXN gene: normal individuals have 5 to 30 GAA repeat expansions, whereas affected individuals have from 70 to more than 1,000 GAA triplets (Al-Mahdawi et al., 2006). |Friedreich ataxia is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive gait and limb ataxia with associated limb muscle weakness, absent lower limb reflexes, extensor plantar responses, dysarthria, and decreased vibratory sense and proprioception. Onset is usually in the first or second decade, before the end of puberty. It is one of the most common forms of autosomal recessive ataxia, occurring in about 1 in 50,000 individuals. Other variable features include visual defects, scoliosis, pes cavus, and cardiomyopathy (review by Delatycki et al., 2000). |Pandolfo (2008) provided an overview of Friedreich ataxia, including pathogenesis, mutation mechanisms, and genotype/phenotype correlation. |Genetic Heterogeneity of Friedreich Ataxia|Another locus for Friedreich ataxia has been mapped to chromosome 9p (FRDA2; 601992).|In FRDA, the spinocerebellar tracts, dorsal columns, pyramidal tracts and, to a lesser extent, the cerebellum and medulla are involved. The disorder is usually manifest before adolescence and is generally characterized by incoordination of limb movements, dysarthria, nystagmus, diminished or absent tendon reflexes, Babinski sign, impairment of position and vibratory senses, scoliosis, pes cavus, and hammertoe. The triad of hypoactive knee and ankle jerks, signs of progressive cerebellar dysfunction, and preadolescent onset is commonly regarded as sufficient for diagnosis. McLeod (1971) found abnormalities in motor and sensory nerve conduction. |Cardiac manifestations are conspicuous in some cases (Boyer et al., 1962). Hewer (1968) found that one-half of 82 fatal cases of Friedreich ataxia died of heart failure and nearly three-quarters had evidence of cardiac dysfunction in life. Twenty-three percent had diabetes and 4 developed diabetic ketosis terminally. One case had an affected parent. Age at death varied from the first (3 cases) to the eighth (1 case) decade with a mean of 36.6 years. Muscular subaortic stenosis has been described in cases of Friedreich ataxia (Elias, 1972; Boehm et al., 1970). Ackroyd et al. (1984) reviewed cardiac findings in 12 children, aged 6 to 16 years, with FA. In 10, EKG abnormalities were found. All had abnormalities of the echocardiogram in the form of symmetric, concentric, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. |Casazza and Morpurgo (1996) reviewed a 15-year experience with a large series of patients with Friedreich ataxia to determine the prevalence of hypokinetic cardiomyopathy and to define which patients among those with and without initial left ventricular hypertrophy are most likely to progress to the hypokinetic-dilated form. They concluded that a transition from the hypertrophic to the hypokinetic-dilated form is not rare. The presence of Q waves identified a subgroup of patients with wall motion abnormalities prone to develop a hypokinetic-dilated left ventricle; these patients have a poor prognosis. |Fortuna et al. (2009) studied in detail possible involvement of visual system pathways in 26 Italian patients with FRDA between 15 and 45 years of age. Twenty-one patients were completely asymptomatic, but visual field examination showed 1 of 3 different patterns of visual field defect: severe visual field impairment with general and concentric reduction of sensitivity, mild reduction of sensitivity and a concentric superior or inferior arcuate defect, and very little depression and only an isolated small paracentral area of reduced sensitivity. Optical coherence tomography showed reduced retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness in all patients and reduced number of axons, and approximately half of patients had abnormal visual evoked potentials. Two of the 26 patients presented with sudden bilateral loss of central vision at 25 and 29 years of age, respectively, similar to Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON; 535000). Two additional patients had had severe ophthalmologic features, close to those with the LHON-like visual loss, manifest by consistent reduction of RNFL thickness, bilateral central visual field involvement, and reduced visual acuity. Overall, the findings indicated that visual field involvement can occur in FRDA, resulting from a slowly progressive degenerative process involving the optic nerve and optic radiations. Fortuna et al. (2009) concluded that loss of central vision associated with poor visual acuity may occur late in the course of FRDA, with a predilection for patients who are compound heterozygotes. |De Michele et al. (1994) found age of onset greater than age 20 in 19 of 114 of their patients with the classic form of FA as defined by autosomal recessive or sporadic occurrence, progressive unremitting ataxia of limbs and gait, and absence of knee and ankle jerks. Each of the described patients had at least one of the following signs: dysarthria, extensor plantar response, and echocardiographic evidence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Linkage analysis was performed for 16 patients and 25 healthy members from 8 of the 17 affected families studied. No recombination was found (maximum lod score of 5.17 at theta = 0.0) with the extended MLS1-MS-GS4 haplotype. This suggests that late-onset FA is likely to be an allelic disorder with classic FA for which the upper limit for age of onset was given as 20 years by Geoffroy et al. (1976) and as 25 years by Harding (1981). Eleven of the patients reported by De Michele et al. (1994) had onset after age 25; 2 of these patients had onset after age 30. The only significant differences between these late-onset patients and the more typical early-onset patients were a lower occurrence of skeletal deformities in the late-onset groups and normal visually evoked potentials which were abnormal in 69% of individuals presenting with FA before age 20. The disease progression was slower in the late-onset group. |The Ataxia Study Group (Pujana et al., 1999) in Spain found no spinocerebellar ataxia (see 164400) or DRPLA (125370)-type mutations (unstable CAG repeat expansions) in 60 late-onset sporadic cases of spinocerebellar ataxia. One of the 60 cases carried a homozygous GAA repeat expansion in the FRDA gene. In this case, the disease began with vertigo episodes at 30 years of age, whereas the onset for gait ataxia was 35 years, with progression of other signs such as dysarthria, areflexia, pes cavus, and reduced motor and sensory conduction velocity. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed moderate cerebellar cortical atrophy. |Lhatoo et al. (2001) reported a case of 'very late onset' Friedreich ataxia, confirmed by genetic testing, in a man who presented with a history of lower limb spasticity beginning at age 40. The features were unusual in that he did not have ataxia (although he did have a spastic gait), nystagmus, areflexia, or sensory neuropathy, and brain scans were normal. |Harding (1981) described absence of lower limb tendon reflexes as an absolute criterion for the diagnosis of Friedreich ataxia, setting aside early-onset cerebellar ataxia with retained tendon reflexes (EOCA; 212895) as a separate category. Palau et al. (1995) presented 6 sibships in which 2 affected probands fulfilled all of Harding's criteria for the diagnosis of Friedreich ataxia, except for the preservation of deep tendon reflexes in the lower extremities. In 3 of these sibships, affected sibs were discordant for the presence or absence of deep tendon reflexes. They considered the presence of cardiomyopathy by ECG or echocardiogram as an essential criterion for this diagnostic category, which they described as Friedreich ataxia with retained reflexes (FARR). A maximum lod score of 3.38 at a recombination fraction theta equal to 0.00 was obtained, suggesting that FARR is an allelic variant of Friedreich ataxia. |Coppola et al. (1999) found that among 101 patients homozygous for GAA expansion within the FRDA gene, 11 from 8 families had FARR. These patients had a lower occurrence of decreased vibration sense, pes cavus, and echocardiographic signs of left ventricular hypertrophy than did the 90 Friedreich ataxia patients with areflexia. Furthermore, the mean age at onset was significantly later (26.6 years vs 14.2 years) and the mean size of a smaller allele was significantly less (408 vs 719 GAA triplets) in FARR patients. The neurophysiologic findings were consistent with milder peripheral neuropathy and milder impairment of the somatosensory pathways in FARR patients. |Marzouki et al. (2001) described 3 Tunisian families with early-onset cerebellar ataxia with retained tendon reflexes in which Friedreich ataxia, vitamin E deficiency ataxia (AVED; 277460), and known forms of autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia were excluded by linkage analysis. |Hanna et al. (1998) described 2 patients with a generalized chorea in the absence of cerebellar signs who were homozygous for the trinucleotide repeat expansion in intron 1 of the FXN gene that is typical of Friedreich ataxia. Chorea as a rare manifestation of Friedreich ataxia had previously been controversial. This was the first report of chorea in patients confirmed to have the FA genetic abnormality. One patient was a 21-year-old student in whom the diagnosis of idiopathic structural thoracic scoliosis was made at the age of 10 years. The scoliosis was treated surgically at age 14 years by insertion of Harrington rods. Neurologic symptoms developed at age 19 years. He noticed that his gait had become abnormal. He described involuntary jerks of his legs interfering with normal gait and causing occasional falls. Similar involuntary movements of his upper arms had stopped him from playing the guitar. His father described him as generally 'twitchy.' Neurologic examination revealed facial and generalized chorea but no cerebellar signs. Eye movements, speech, and optic discs were normal. He was areflexic. Genetic analysis showed repeat sizes of 500 and 800 repeats in the 2 alleles of the FXN gene. The second case was that of a 13-year-old boy who at the age of 10 years developed recurrent palpitations and was found to have ventricular arrhythmias secondary to a mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. His parents described him as generally twitchy and clumsy over the past year, but there was no history of gait disturbance. Neurologic examination revealed mild generalized chorea involving particularly his head, neck, and shoulders. Eye movements, speech, and optic discs were normal. Although he was generally mildly clumsy, there were no unequivocal cerebellar signs. Genetic analysis confirmed that he was homozygous for the FA intron 1 expansion with both alleles measuring 4.5 kb corresponding to a repeat size of approximately 1,000 repeats. |
600274::this form of frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT; 157140) on chromosome 17q21. Most cases are caused by heterozygous mutation, although rare homozygous mutations have been reported.|Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) refers to a clinical manifestation of the pathologic finding of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). FTD, the most common subtype of FTLD, is a behavioral variant characterized by changes in social and personal conduct with loss of volition, executive dysfunction, loss of abstract thought, and decreased speech output. A second clinical subtype of FTLD is 'semantic dementia,' characterized by specific loss of comprehension of language and impaired facial and object recognition. A third clinical subtype of FTLD is 'primary progressive aphasia' (PPA), characterized by a reduction in speech production, speech errors, and word retrieval difficulties resulting in mutism and an inability to communicate. All subtypes have relative preservation of memory, at least in the early stages. FTLD is often associated with parkinsonism or motor neuron disease (MND) resembling amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS; 105400) (reviews by Tolnay and Probst, 2002 and Mackenzie and Rademakers, 2007). Mackenzie et al. (2009, 2010) provided a classification of FTLD subtypes according to the neuropathologic findings (see PATHOGENESIS below). |Tauopathies comprise a clinically variable group of neurodegenerative diseases characterized neuropathologically by accumulation of abnormal MAPT-positive inclusions in nerve and/or glial cells. In addition to frontotemporal dementia, semantic dementia, and PPA, different clinical syndromes with overlapping features have been described, leading to confusion in the terminology (Tolnay and Probst, 2002). Other terms used historically include parkinsonism and dementia with pallidopontonigral degeneration (PPND) (Wszolek et al., 1992); disinhibition-dementia-parkinsonism-amyotrophy complex (DDPAC) (Lynch et al., 1994); frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism (FLDEM) (Yamaoka et al., 1996); and multiple system tauopathy with presenile dementia (MSTD) (Spillantini et al., 1997). These disorders are characterized by variable degrees of frontal lobe dementia, parkinsonism, motor neuron disease, and amyotrophy. |Other neurodegenerative associated with mutations in the MAPT gene include Pick disease (172700) and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP; 601104),|Inherited neurodegenerative tauopathies linked to chromosome 17 and caused by mutation in the MAPT gene have also been collectively termed 'FTDP17' (Lee et al., 2001). |Kertesz (2003) suggested the term 'Pick complex' to represent the overlapping syndromes of FTD, primary progressive aphasia (PPA), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), PSP, and FTD with motor neuron disease. He noted that frontotemporal dementia may also be referred to as 'clinical Pick disease' and that the term 'Pick disease' should be restricted to the pathologic finding of Pick bodies.|Mutations in several different genes can cause frontotemporal dementia and frontotemporal lobar degeneration, with or without motor neuron disease. See FTLD with TDP43 inclusions (607485), caused by mutation in the GRN gene (138945) on chromosome 17q21; FTLD mapping to chromosome 3 (600795), caused by mutation in the CHMP2B gene (609512); inclusion body myopathy with Paget disease and FTD (IBMPFD; 167320), caused by mutation in the VCP gene (601023) on chromosome 9p13; ALS6 (608030), caused by mutation in the FUS gene (137070) on 16p11; ALS10 (612069), caused by mutation in the TARDBP gene (605078) on 1p36; and FTDALS (105550), caused by mutation in the C9ORF72 gene (614260) on 9p.|In 1 family with FTD, a mutation was identified in the presenilin-1 gene (PSEN1; 104311) on chromosome 14, which is usually associated with a familial form of early-onset Alzheimer disease (AD3; 607822).|Schmitt et al. (1984) reported a family in which 10 individuals had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, parkinsonism-dementia or both. The proband was a 59-year-old man who died after a 14-year course of an illness characterized by progressive dementia, parkinsonism, and ALS. The affected persons were rather widely separated in the family, suggesting to the authors recessive inheritance 'with genetic epistasis.' The pathologic features consisted particularly of Alzheimer neurofibrillary tangles in many areas. |Wszolek et al. (1992) reported a large kindred in which 32 members in 8 generations had a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive parkinsonism with dystonia, dementia, ocular motility abnormalities, pyramidal tract dysfunction, frontal lobe release signs, perseverative vocalizations, and urinary incontinence. The course was exceptionally 'aggressive'; onset of symptoms and death consistently occurred in the fifth decade. In the 4 patients so studied, positron emission tomographic (PET) studies with labeled 6-fluoro-L-DOPA (6FD) demonstrated markedly reduced striatal uptake of the 6FD. Autopsy findings included severe neuronal loss with gliosis in substantia nigra, pontine tegmentum, and globus pallidus, with less involvement of the caudate and the putamen. There were no plaques, tangles, Lewy bodies, or amyloid bodies. The pedigree was entirely consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance. Wszolek et al. (1992) proposed the designation autosomal dominant parkinsonism and dementia with pallidopontonigral degeneration (PPND). Wijker et al. (1996) stated that the kindred described by Wszolek et al. (1992) contained 34 affected individuals over 9 generations. The onset of the disease varied from 32 to 58 years. Wijker et al. (1996) estimated that the disease penetrance was 15% by age 40, 80% by age 45, and more than 90% after 50. |Delisle et al. (1999) reported 2 brothers from a French family who presented early in the fourth decade with a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by an akinetic rigid syndrome and dementia. There was widespread neuronal and glial tau accumulation in the cortex, basal ganglia, brainstem nuclei, and white matter. |Yamaoka et al. (1996) described FLDEM as characterized by behavioral and neuropsychologic features reflecting frontal lobe dysfunction. The changes in behavior and personality that are observed within this clinical category may not present as a distinct phenotype and may even suggest other diagnoses such as schizophrenia, amyotrophy, depression, or dysphasia among various affected members of a family (Lynch et al., 1994). |Lynch et al. (1994) described 13 affected individuals, 6 of whom were living, in family Mo. The mean age of onset was 45 years. Personality and behavioral changes, including the Kluever-Bucy syndrome, were the first symptoms in 12 individuals. All affected individuals demonstrated rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability. Mean duration of the disease was 13 years. Genetic etiology was suspected because of the familial clustering in family Mo, despite their wide geographic distribution. Clinical features of individual family members suggested a variety of unrelated clinical diagnoses. Two members who had died before the study was initiated had been institutionalized and carried the diagnosis of schizophrenia. Five family members had depression or alcoholism as young adults. A clinical diagnosis of amyotrophy was made in another. In retrospect, when all the cases were viewed as a group, there was a common theme. Disinhibition occurred early in the disease course. This was manifested by alcoholism, hyperreligiosity, inappropriate sexual behavior, excessive eating, and shoplifting. Curiously, many exhibited a pattern of hoarding and craving of sweets. Eventually, all affected family members developed frontal lobe dementia, affecting behavior and judgment more than language and praxis, and parkinsonism. |Doran et al. (2007) reported a large family from Liverpool, England, in which 8 individuals had frontotemporal dementia associated with the MAPT intron 10 +16 mutation (157140.0006). All patients were initially diagnosed with Alzheimer disease because of presentation of memory deficits and word-finding difficulties. Prototypic features of frontotemporal dementia, such as disinhibition and personality changes, were not noted initially. Doran et al. (2007) noted the phenotypic variability of this mutation. |Josephs et al. (2009) suggested that there are 2 distinct subtypes of right temporal variant frontotemporal dementia, in which the right temporal lobe is the most atrophic region on brain imaging. Among 20 individuals with these imaging findings, 12 had the behavioral variant of FTD, and 8 had semantic dementia. In the behavioral variant group, the most common features were personality change and inappropriate behavior, whereas in the semantic dementia group, the most common features were prosopagnosia, word-finding difficulties, comprehension problems, and topographagnosia. Brain imaging also showed that the behavioral variant group had greater volume loss in the frontal lobes compared to the semantic group, whereas the semantic group showed greater fusiform loss. All 8 behavioral variant patients with pathologic/genetic studies showed abnormalities in the tau protein, including 7 with MAPT mutations, whereas all 3 with semantic dementia studied showed abnormalities in TDP43. These findings suggested that there may be 2 subtypes of right temporal variant frontotemporal dementia. |Neuropathologic examination of 6 affected family members by Lynch et al. (1994) demonstrated frontotemporal atrophy and neuronal loss superficial (layer 2) spongiform change, and neuronal loss with gliosis in the substantia nigra and amygdala. Anterior horn cell loss was found in each of the 2 spinal cords examined. One of these was from a person with signs and symptoms of amyotrophy. |Neuropathologic examination of 1 affected family member with FTD-ALS by Wilhelmsen et al. (2004) showed cortical atrophy, atrophy of the hippocampus and amygdala, depigmentation of the substantia nigra and locus ceruleus, and both alpha-synuclein (SNCA; 163890) and tau inclusions. No mutations were identified in the MAPT gene. Protein analysis showed that the insoluble tau consisted predominantly of the 4R/0N isoform. Linkage analysis suggested a disease locus on chromosome 17q between markers D17S1862 and D17S928 (lod score of 2.05), distal to the MAPT gene. |Forman et al. (2006) performed a clinicopathologic assessment of 124 patients with either a clinical or pathologic diagnosis of frontotemporal dementia. Neuropathologic examination showed that 46% had a tauopathy, 29% had FTLD with ubiquitin inclusions, and 17% had findings consistent with Alzheimer disease. Patients with FTLD with ubiquitin inclusions were more likely to present with social and language dysfunction; tauopathies were more commonly associated with an extrapyramidal disorder; and AD was associated with greater deficits in memory and executive function. |
229600::hereditary fructose intolerance is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding aldolase B (ALDOB; 612724) on chromosome 9q31.|Fructose intolerance becomes apparent in infancy at the time of weaning, when fructose or sucrose is added to the diet. Clinical features include recurrent vomiting, abdominal pain, and hypoglycemia that may be fatal. Long-term exposure to fructose can result in liver failure, renal tubulopathy, and growth retardation. Older patients who survive infancy develop a natural avoidance of sweets and fruits. Ali et al. (1998) provided a detailed review of the biochemical, genetic, and molecular basis of aldolase B deficiency in hereditary fructose intolerance. |Chambers and Pratt (1956) first reported fructose intolerance in a 24-year-old woman who complained of nausea, abdominal pain, and faintness after ingesting sugar and fructose. She did not enjoy sweet tastes. The authors termed the phenomenon 'idiosyncrasy to fructose,' and postulated that some of the symptoms resulted from hypoglycemia (Ali et al., 1998). |Perheentupa and Pitkanen (1962) reported a severely affected infant who had recurrent hypoglycemia and vomiting after weaning, when fructose or sucrose was added to the diet. The symptoms resulted in marked malnutrition. However, the patient's 3-year-old brother only developed hepatomegaly and hypoglycemic shock after an oral test dose of fructose. He was otherwise clinically healthy, but showed a marked aversion to sweets and fruit.|Froesch et al. (1963) described 2 adults, aged 33 and 39 years, with fructose intolerance. In addition to the aversion to fructose-containing foods, both had a remarkable absence of dental caries. Swales and Smith (1966) described an affected 21-year-old man, and Kohlin and Melin (1968) reported adult cases. |Mass et al. (1966) reported a patient with fructose intolerance who had developed renal tubular acidosis. It was unclear to the authors whether this was an independent disorder or a complication of the fructosemia. Perheentupa and Raivio (1967) discussed hyperuricemia in this disorder. |Mandel et al. (1990) reported an infant with fructose intolerance in whom the diagnosis was delayed due to the finding of hemophagocytosis in the bone marrow. The authors noted that most, if not all, patients with fructose intolerance have neonatal hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, and an abnormal fructose or glycerol loading test. Hypoglycemic attacks occur later in life and are associated with severe hyperuricemia and metabolic acidosis. Therapeutic measures include restriction of fructose intake and avoidance of prolonged fasting, particularly during febrile episodes. |Ali et al. (1998) noted that infants with fructose intolerance can have a severe reaction, including lethargy, seizures, and coma, if large quantities of sugar are ingested. In addition, persistent intake can lead to chronic toxicity, including liver and kidney damage. Those who survive the early period without correct diagnosis develop a self-protective aversion to the harmful sugars. |Esposito et al. (2010) reported 2 unrelated patients with fructose intolerance who were determined to be heterozygous for a mutation in the ALDOB gene. One patient with an R46W substitution (612724.0014) had mild hypoglycemia and ketosis after ingestion of fructose and a marked aversion to sweets and fruit. The second patient with a Y343H substitution (612724.0015) was hospitalized for a series of febrile episodes associated with sever liver dysfunction at age 8 months. She died 1 month later from unknown causes. In vitro functional expression studies of both variants showed variably compromised enzyme activity. The report emphasized that heterozygous ALDOB mutations may result in symptoms in some patients. |An adult form of fructose intolerance was reported by Lameire et al. (1978) in a Belgian patient. When a fructose solution was used for intravenous alimentation during management of viral meningitis, a 21-year-old man developed severe illness characterized by acute jaundice, gastrointestinal bleeding, hypoglycemia, proximal tubular acidosis, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. The renal disorder was characterized by glycosuria, amino aciduria, phosphaturia, and bicarbonaturia with high urinary pH despite metabolic acidosis. Liver fructose-1-phosphate aldolase activity was 30% of normal, and fructose-1,6-diphosphate aldolase activity was normal. In classic fructose intolerance, these values are 0 to 6% and 10 to 50% of normal, respectively. Thus, the patient appeared to have a mild form of the disorder, may have been heterozygous, and likely showed manifestations only because of the massive fructose infusion. |
229700::fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase deficiency (FBP1D) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase-1 (FBP1; 611570) on chromosome 9q22.|Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by impaired gluconeogenesis. Patients present with hypoglycemia and metabolic acidosis on fasting and may have episodes of hyperventilation, apnea, hypoglycemia, and ketosis. Although the disorder may be lethal in the newborn period, proper treatment yields an excellent prognosis (Kikawa et al., 1997; Matsuura et al., 2002). |Baker and Winegrad (1970) described a girl with hypoglycemia and metabolic acidosis on fasting. Biochemical studies showed impaired gluconeogenesis due to deficiency of hepatic fructose-1,6-diphosphatase. A sib had died of a clinically similar ailment. |The patient of Baerlocher et al. (1971) had consanguineous parents and 2 sisters had died, apparently of the same disorder. Hulsmann and Fernandez (1971) reported a consanguineous family with 2 affected sibs. |Pagliara et al. (1972) reported an 8-month-old female who experienced attacks of hyperventilation when weaned to baby food at age 6 months. She was admitted with severe lactic acidosis and hypoglycemia. Adequate carbohydrate intake, with sucrose and fructose excluded, prevented lactic acidosis and hypoglycemia. No hepatic fructose-1,6-diphosphatase activity was detected. |Greene et al. (1972) reported successful treatment of 2 patients with folic acid. Odievre et al. (1975) observed 2 affected sisters. |Buhrdel et al. (1990) reported 4 unrelated infants, 3 boys and a girl, with fructose-1,6-diphosphatase deficiency. All 4 patients had less than 25% residual hepatic enzyme activity. Of 3 patients analyzed, 2 boys showed the enzyme deficiency in leukocytes, whereas the girl had normal leukocyte enzyme activity. Three patients had pronounced neonatal hyperbilirubinemia requiring exchange transfusion. |Moses et al. (1991) reported 9 patients belonging to 6 families in Israel; 2 of the families were Jewish, 3 Moslem Arab, and 1 Druze. All patients had neonatal hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, and an abnormal fructose or glycerol loading test. At a later age, instances of hypoglycemia occurred in patients with or without preceding illness. Hypoglycemic attacks were associated with severe hyperuricemia and metabolic acidosis. Therapeutic measures included a restriction in fructose intake and avoidance of prolonged fasting, particularly during febrile episodes. |Kikawa et al. (1997) reported 13 Japanese patients from 11 families with FBP1 deficiency. Three families were consanguineous. All patients had recurrent attacks of metabolic acidosis and hypoglycemia associated with vomiting, drowsiness, or tachypnea. Age at onset of the first symptoms ranged from day 1 to 4 years. |Matsuura et al. (2002) reported a Japanese girl with FBP1 deficiency. She presented at age 2 months with a febrile illness and hyperventilation. Laboratory studies showed hypoglycemia and severe metabolic acidosis. No FBP1 activity was detected in leukocytes; her parents had normal leukocyte enzyme activity. A high carbohydrate diet and reduction of fructose intake completely prevented further episodes. Molecular analysis identified compound heterozygous mutations in the FBP1 gene (611570.0005; 611570.0006). |
606812::fumarase deficiency (FMRD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the fumarate hydratase gene (FH; 136850) on chromosome 1q43.Heterozygous mutation in the FH gene can cause hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC; 150800).|Fumarase deficiency is a severe autosomal recessive metabolic disorder characterized by early-onset hypotonia, profound psychomotor retardation, and brain abnormalities, such as agenesis of the corpus callosum, gyral defects, and ventriculomegaly. Many patients show neonatal distress, metabolic acidosis, and/or encephalopathy (summary by Kerrigan et al., 2000 and Mroch et al., 2012).|Zinn et al. (1986) reported the case of a male infant with mitochondrial encephalopathy who presented at 1 month of age with failure to thrive, developmental delay, hypotonia, cerebral atrophy, lactic and pyruvic acidemia, and fumaric aciduria. The patient died at 8 months of age. Mitochondria isolated from skeletal muscle showed selective defects in the oxidation of glutamate and succinate, whereas isolated liver mitochondria oxidized these normally. Fumarase activity was virtually absent in mitochondria of both sources. Homogenates of liver and muscle also showed very much reduced fumarase activity, indicating that the cytosolic form of the enzyme was also deficient. Organ differences in intramitochondrial accumulation of fumarase were thought to account for the selective oxidative defects observed in skeletal muscle and not in liver mitochondria. |Whelan et al. (1983) reported isolated fumaric aciduria in 2 adult sibs with mental retardation and speech impairment. The authors attributed the increased urinary excretion to a defect in renal clearance; fumarase activity was not assessed. Petrova-Benedict et al. (1987) reported a case of fumarase deficiency in a mentally retarded child who presented at 6 months of age with hypotonia, microcephaly, and delayed development. Fumarase was deficient in both the mitochondrial and the cytosolic compartments, but the cytosolic enzyme appeared to be more severely affected. Snodgrass (1987) commented on the occurrence of mild hyperammonemia in fumarase deficiency. Gellera et al. (1990) described the clinical features of fumarase deficiency. A 7-month old boy died in a demented state after a clinical course characterized by generalized seizures, psychomotor deterioration, and fumaric aciduria. Marked deficiency of both mitochondrial and cytosolic fumarases was found in skeletal muscle, brain, cerebellum, heart, kidney, liver, and cultured fibroblasts. Anti-fumarase crossreacting material was present in negligible amounts in these tissues. |Kerrigan et al. (2000) reported the clinical features of 8 affected members of a large consanguineous family with fumarase deficiency living in an isolated community in the southwestern United States. The ages of the patients ranged from 20 months to 12 years. All patients were profoundly developmentally retarded and had no language development. Only 1 child had achieved independent walking; all the others were unable to sit. All patients had relative macrocephaly and ventricular enlargement. Other common features included hypotonia, seizures, and status epilepticus. Dysmorphic features included frontal bossing, hypertelorism, depressed nasal bridge, anteverted nares, and high-arched palate. Five of 8 had polycythemia at birth. Neuroimaging showed striking abnormalities of the brain, including polymicrogyria, angulation of the frontal horns, decreased periventricular white matter, and small brainstem. Four patients had optic nerve hypoplasia or pallor. |Mroch et al. (2012) reported 2 brothers, born of unrelated parents, with genetically confirmed FH deficiency resulting in death in infancy. The first boy was born prematurely from a pregnancy complicated by polyhydramnios, and showed hypotonia and respiratory insufficiency after birth. An ultrasound at 20 weeks' gestation had shown agenesis of the corpus callosum, ventriculomegaly, bilateral renal pyelectasis, and a ventriculoseptal defect. Postmortem imaging showed lissencephaly. He developed severe metabolic acidosis, necrotizing enterocolitis, liver failure associated with coagulopathy and hyperbilirubinemia, and encephalopathy, resulting in death at age 22 days. Biochemical studies showed increased urinary tyrosine metabolites, citric cycle intermediates, citrulline, fumaric, malic, and succinic acids, and skin biopsy showed fumarase deficiency. Postmortem examination showed a distended abdomen, and the liver showed intrahepatic bile stasis. Electron microscopy of the liver revealed multiple swollen mitochondria with flat, plate-like, haphazardly arranged cristae. Genetic analysis identified compound heterozygosity for a point mutation in the FH gene and a deletion of the FH gene (136850.0010 and 136850.0011). Prenatal diagnosis confirming the deficiency was performed on the subsequent pregnancy by genetic testing of amniocytes. Ultrasound at 20 weeks showed ventriculomegaly, dangling choroid plexus, and possible agenesis of the corpus callosum. The parents elected to continue with the pregnancy, but the infant died on day 26. Postmortem examination again showed hepatic involvement, with fibrosis, iron deposition, and bile stasis. Electron microscopy showed abnormal mitochondria similar to that observed in his affected brother. Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for 1 of the mutations, and neither showed cancer or abnormal cutaneous findings suggesting HLRCC. |
613163::GABA-transaminase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ABAT gene (137150) on chromosome 16p13.|GABA-transaminase deficiency is characterized by neonatal or early infantile-onset encephalopathy, hypotonia, hypersomnolence, epilepsy, choreoathetosis, and accelerated linear growth. Electroencephalograms show burst-suppression, modified hypsarrhythmia, multifocal spikes, and generalized spike-wave. Severity varies, but most patients have profound developmental impairment and some patients die in infancy (summary by Koenig et al., 2017). |Jaeken et al. (1984) reported 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Flemish parents, who presented with severe hypotonia, psychomotor retardation, and hyperreflexia. The proband had accelerated linear growth associated with increased growth hormone. Cerebrospinal fluid showed high levels of free GABA, homocarnosine (a dipeptide of GABA and histidine), and beta-alanine (an alternative substrate for GABA-transaminase). Liver GABA-transaminase was deficient. Brain-evoked responses were suggestive of leukodystrophy. A brother, who showed a similar clinical picture, had died at 1 year of age. Postmortem showed leukodystrophy of the type seen in aminoacidopathies such as phenylketonuria (PKU; 261600). The proband died at age 25 months (Gibson et al., 1986). |Medina-Kauwe et al. (1999) described a second unrelated patient with GABA-aminotransferase deficiency and reviewed the patient reported by Jaeken et al. (1984). The phenotype in both included severe psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, hyperreflexia, lethargy, refractory seizures, high-pitched cry, and EEG abnormalities. The second patient did not have increased linear growth. Brain MRI of the second patient showed agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar hypoplasia, a posterior fossa cyst, and abnormal gyration. GABA concentrations were significantly increased in all bodily fluids. He died at 5 months of age. |Tsuji et al. (2010) reported a 28-month-old Japanese female, born of nonconsanguineous parents, with GABA-aminotransferase deficiency. At age 7 months, the child showed psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, bilateral intermittent esotropia, hyperreflexia, and positive Babinski reflex. There was no dysmorphism. At age 8 months, she showed decreased consciousness after an acute febrile illness. Respiratory distress required mechanical ventilation and she experienced myoclonic jerks. EEG revealed diffuse slow spike and wave discharges with 1- to 2-s periods of suppression. Amino acid analysis showed elevated free GABA in the serum and cerebral spinal fluid. Proton MR spectroscopy showed significant elevation of GABA as well as a slight elevation of glutamine/glutamate complex in the basal ganglia and semioval center. GABA-transaminase deficiency was confirmed by enzyme studies in cultured lymphoblasts. Koenig et al. (2017) provided a follow-up of this patient at age 9.5 years. She was nonverbal, nonambulatory with spastic quadriparesis and dystonia, and dependent on gastrostomy tube feedings, but was relatively stable with rare convulsive seizures. EEG background was slow spike-wave. |Nagappa et al. (2017) reported a child, born of nonconsanguineous parents, who presented at 6 months of age with global developmental delay and hypersomnolence since birth. The duration of her sleep ranged from 18 to 20 hours a day. She had hypotonia, brisk muscle stretch reflexes, and Babinski reflex, and showed inconsistent visual tracking and response to sound stimulus. From age 8 months, she had a hyperkinetic movement disorder characterized by continuous arrhythmic movements of the distal extremities while awake. She also exhibited frequent tongue protrusions and eyebrow elevations. None of these movements were present during sleep. Brain MRI at 5 months of age showed restricted diffusion along the internal capsule and genu of corpus callosum, and EEG was normal. MRI at 10 months of age showed hyperintensities in the brainstem and external and internal capsules, a 'trilaminated' appearance of posterior limb of the internal capsule, and dysmyelination of subcortical white matter. MR spectroscopy from basal ganglia showed a prominent peak between 2.2 ppm and 2.4 ppm, indicating pronounced elevation of glutamine, glutamate, and GABA. EEG at 18 months of age showed recurrent multifocal epileptiform discharges, and she was treated with levetiracetam and clonazepan. Although the authors could not quantify GABA levels, they suggested that the MRS finding provided indirect evidence of reduced function of ABAT. |Koenig et al. (2017) reviewed a series of 10 cases of GABA-transaminase deficiency. Five patients were alive with age at last follow-up of 18 months to 9.5 years. All patients presented with neonatal/infantile-onset encephalopathy, hypotonia, and hypersomnolence. Median age at onset was 3 months, with 4 having neonatal presentations. |
230400::classic galactosemia is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase gene (GALT; 606999) on chromosome 9p13.|Classic galactosemia is an autosomal recessive disorder of galactose metabolism. Most patients present in the neonatal period, after ingestion of galactose, with jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly, hepatocellular insufficiency, food intolerance, hypoglycemia, renal tubular dysfunction, muscle hypotonia, sepsis, and cataract. Long-term complications include mental retardation, verbal dyspraxia, motor abnormalities, and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (summary by Bosch, 2006).|The first detailed description of galactosemia was given by Goppert (1917). The proband (A.G.) presented with large liver, icterus, failure to thrive, and urinary excretion of albumen and sugar. After exclusion of galactose from the diet, these signs and symptoms normalized. He was mentally retarded (developmental quotient of 14 months at 36 months of age). He tolerated sucrose, maltose, glucose, and fructose at doses of 2 g/kg, but after lactose or galactose there was dose-dependent galactosuria. His oldest brother had suffered from icterus and liver enlargement a few days after birth and had had a life-threatening bleed after ritual circumcision. He died after 6 weeks. At autopsy, a huge liver tumor was present (attributed to syphilis, although subsequent Wassermann reactions were negative), and the cause of his death was attributed to nephritis. His third sib, born somewhat prematurely, became icteric, and died after 4 weeks. Goppert (1917) concluded that the patient was suffering from a familial liver disorder and that in such cases lactose must be replaced by another sugar, e.g., sucrose or maltose. Another early detailed description of galactosemia was given by Mason and Turner (1935). Segal (1989) presented a picture of a 30-year-old man diagnosed in infancy by Mason and Turner (1935).|Failure to thrive is the most common initial clinical symptom of galactosemia. Vomiting or diarrhea usually begins within a few days of milk ingestion. Jaundice of intrinsic liver disease may be accentuated by the severe hemolysis occurring in some patients. Cataracts have been observed within a few days of birth. These may be found only on slit-lamp examination and missed with an ophthalmoscope, since they consist of punctate lesions in the fetal lens nucleus (Holton et al., 2001). There appears to be a high frequency of neonatal death due to E. coli sepsis, with a fulminant course (Levy et al., 1977). Litchfield and Wells (1978) suggested that this proneness to sepsis is due to inhibition of leukocyte bactericidal activity. |Ruiz et al. (1999) concluded that coagulopathy may be present in galactosemia with little evidence of liver disease (Levy et al., 1996). They suggested, furthermore, that the association of jaundice and hemorrhagic diathesis in the first 2 weeks of life is a clinical presentation in which galactosemia must be considered. |Ovarian failure in many affected girls (Kaufman et al., 1979) may indicate in utero damage from galactosemia. Pregnancy is rare in women with galactosemia because of the high frequency of hypergonadotropic hypogonadism with ovarian atrophy. |Harley et al. (1974) found low levels (presumably indicative of the heterozygous state) of galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase and galactokinase in mothers of children with otherwise unexplained infantile cataract. They suggested that a lactose load in combination with the low enzyme level leads to cataract. |Brivet et al. (1989) described a 24-year-old woman homozygous for GALT deficiency who, despite strict galactose-free diet, suffered self-intoxication probably due to lactose biosynthesis while breastfeeding her baby. Lactosuria is a common finding in pregnant women because of lactose biosynthesis by the mammary glands beginning in the second trimester. Brivet et al. (1989) described the development of cataracts in a healthy lactating 28-year-old woman heterozygous for GALT deficiency. Avisar et al. (1982) had likewise observed rapidly progressing cataract in a lactating heterozygote. |Reports of 14 pregnancies in patients with galactosemia were noted by Waggoner et al. (1990). De Jongh et al. (1999) reported a galactosemic woman who had an uncomplicated full-term pregnancy and produced a clinically normal infant. The diagnosis in the mother had been made when she was 2 weeks old, and she had been maintained on a lactose- and galactose-free diet. The pregnancy occurred at the age of 30 years. She had slight mental retardation (IQ, 85). She remained on a lactose- and galactose-free diet throughout her pregnancy. This patient was Caucasian; all but one of the previously reported patients were black and may not have had classic galactosemia. The mother in this case was found to be heterozygous for the common Q188R mutation (606999.0006). Since no GALT activity was detected in erythrocytes, a mutation in the other allele was suspected but not found. The obligate heterozygous offspring of this woman had no apparent adverse effects of the maternal galactosemic state. |
231950::glutathionuria is caused by homozygous deletion/insertion in the GGT1 gene (612346) on chromosome 22q11. One such family has been reported.|Gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase (see GGT1; 612346) acts as a glutathionase and catalyzes the transfer of the glutamyl moiety of glutathione to a variety of amino acids and dipeptide acceptors. This enzyme is located on the outer surface of the cell membrane. It is widely distributed in mammalian tissues involved in absorption and secretion. In humans, hepatic GGT activity is elevated in some liver diseases. GGT is released into the bloodstream after liver damage, and an elevated level of the enzyme may be a useful early sign of hepatocellular carcinoma. Schulman et al. (1975) described a mildly retarded adult male with glutathionemia and marked glutathionuria, whose cultured skin fibroblasts showed very low activity of the transpeptidase. Since several studies have suggested that the transpeptidase may play a role in cellular amino acid transport, the lack of amino aciduria and amino acidemia was noteworthy. O'Daley (1968) may have described the same condition. |Hammond et al. (1995) reported sisters with GGT deficiency. The elder of the 2 sibs was detected during the course of a population screening on infants at 6 weeks of age using ascending paper chromatography of urine, which revealed a migration spot similar to that of cystine. Her growth and development were normal. During the second year, easy bruising was noted. Asthma was diagnosed at 2.5 years but was never a major problem. At 10 years of age, she began having attacks of absence and an EEG showed typical 3-Hz spike and wave activity. Seizures were controlled by valproate medication. At age 21 years, she had no significant health problems, had a good secretarial position, and was pursuing a course at technical college. The younger sister was somewhat hypotonic and inactive at birth and had a dislocated hip and mild bilateral equinovarus. Tube feeding was required for the first 4 months. Problems noted later included strabismus, easy bruising, poor coordination, and some dysmorphic features. A diagnosis of Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS; 176270) was confirmed by demonstration of an interstitial deletion of 15q11-q13. Both sisters had normal red cell glutathione and no Heinz bodies. Clearly there were no specific clinical indicators for GGT deficiency, which in the younger sister was unrelated to PWS. |Darin et al. (2018) reviewed 6 previously reported patients from 4 families. Most patients presented with involvement of central nervous system in the form of mild to moderate mental retardation, behavioral disturbances, and in 1 case, seizures. Marfanoid features were reported in 2 sibs. The age of diagnosis ranged from the second to the sixth decade of life. Darin et al. (2018) described 2 previously unreported sibs born to consanguineous Turkish parents. The brother was diagnosed at 10 years of age. In addition to the previously reported features, he had hypertelorism and low-set ears. The sister was diagnosed at 25 years of age with mild mental retardation, a mild tremor, and mild hyperreflexia. The brother's MRI showed agenesis of the corpus callosum and multiple cortical heterotopias. The girl's MRI was normal. Both sibs had increased glutathionuria and markedly decreased plasma gamma-GT activity of less than 0.05 microKAT per liter (normal range 0.15-0.75).|
263800::Gitelman syndrome (GTLMNS) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the (SLC12A3; 600968) on chromosome 16q13.|Gitelman syndrome is an autosomal recessive renal tubular salt-wasting disorder characterized by hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis with hypomagnesemia and hypocalciuria. It is the most common renal tubular disorder among Caucasians (prevalence of 1 in 40,000). Most patients have onset of symptoms as adults, but some can present in childhood. Clinical features include transient periods of muscle weakness and tetany, abdominal pains, and chondrocalcinosis (summary by Glaudemans et al., 2012). Gitelman syndrome is sometimes referred to as a mild variant of classic Bartter syndrome (607364).For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Bartter syndrome, see 607364. |It has been proposed that Bartter syndrome, defined generically as an autosomal recessive disorder featuring hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis with salt wasting, is a heterogeneous entity with at least 2 subsets, Gitelman syndrome and 'true Bartter syndrome.' Simon et al. (1996) stated that Gitelman syndrome refers to the numerically predominant subset of patients with hypokalemic alkalosis in conjunction with hypocalciuria and hypomagnesemia, whereas true Bartter syndrome refers to patients with normal or hypercalciuria and typically normal magnesium levels. True Bartter patients usually present under the age of 5 years with signs of intravascular volume depletion, whereas Gitelman syndrome patients typically present at older ages without overt hypovolemia. Nevertheless, the overlapping features of these disorders has resulted in considerable confusion and controversy regarding their classification, with many patients with features of Gitelman syndrome being labeled as having Bartter syndrome. |Gitelman et al. (1966) reported 2 affected sisters who were the offspring of parents related as half first cousins once removed. They had experienced occasional mild episodes of muscle weakness and had suffered for many years from a chronic dermatitis characterized by thickening with a purple-red hue. Erythema of the skin is a feature of experimental magnesium depletion in the rat. Spencer and Voyce (1976) reported 3 affected sibs. Symptoms were precipitated by nonspecific illness and consisted mainly of tetany. A depressed creatinine clearance in the oldest sib (aged 19 years) suggested renal damage from hypokalemia. Long-term correction of the potassium deficiency is warranted. |Zarraga Larrondo et al. (1992) described a 33-year-old woman who presented with hypokalemia-hypomagnesemia associated with renal potassium and magnesium wasting. Her mean 24-hr urinary calcium excretion was strikingly low despite normocalcemia, normal creatinine clearance, and normal serum parathyroid hormone and calcitriol. In response to intravenous furosemide, the patient showed significant increments in sodium, chloride and magnesium excretion as well as abolition of hypocalciuria. The dissociation of renal calcium transport from magnesium transport together with exaggerated natriuresis after furosemide suggested the presence of a defect in the distal tubule rather than in the loop of Henle. The patient's symptoms included paresthesia and carpopedal spasms. She had been hospitalized at the age of 23 for tetanic convulsions which were interpreted as periodic hypokalemia. She often felt tired and had muscle cramps provoked by physical exertion. She had not been treated with diuretics, antirheumatics or hormones, and denied laxative abuse or diarrhea. |Hisakawa et al. (1998) identified 25 cases of an association between Bartter syndrome and chondrocalcinosis (118600) that were reported between 1978 and 1998. Hypomagnesemia had been associated with chondrocalcinosis. Because all of the reports of an association with Bartter syndrome referred to hypomagnesemia and hypocalciuria, Hisakawa et al. (1998) suggested that these might be cases of Gitelman syndrome, not 'true' Bartter syndrome. Hisakawa et al. (1998) described a 45-year-old Japanese woman, treated for Bartter syndrome for 14 years, who presented with numbness of her extremities and polyarthralgia. It was concluded that she had Gitelman syndrome with chondrocalcinosis, and treatment with spironolactone and magnesium supplementation was effective. Previously reported cases of 'Bartter syndrome' with chondrocalcinosis were tabulated. |Gitelman syndrome is widely described as a benign or milder variant of Bartter syndrome. However, Pachulski et al. (2005) described a patient with this disorder who presented with presyncope coincident with long runs of ventricular tachycardia. The otherwise well 39-year-old woman took no medications. Serum potassium and magnesium levels were very low. An electrophysiologic study was negative for inducible, sustained ventricular tachycardia; however, the patient continued to have ventricular tachycardia with presyncope despite aggressive potassium and magnesium supplementation. The patient was managed with amiodarone and an implanted defibrillator to guard against a potential breakthrough of sustained ventricular arrhythmia. Pachulski et al. (2005) pointed to reports suggesting that about half the patients with Gitelman syndrome have QTc prolongation. Although Gitelman syndrome is described as an asymptomatic or benign disorder with characteristic electrolyte abnormalities, most reports of clinical series document presyncope, vertigo, ataxia, and blurred vision. Patients, particularly those with prolonged QTc, should be investigated for ventricular arrhythmia. |Ng et al. (2006) reported a 22-year-old Chinese man with Gitelman syndrome. He reported periodic paralysis since age 11 years. The episodes usually developed after strenuous exercise and lasted 2 to 3 days with spontaneous resolution. Laboratory studies showed decreased serum potassium, decreased serum magnesium, and low calcium excretion. Genetic analysis identified compound heterozygosity for mutations in the SLC12A3 gene (600968.0013; 600968.0014). His unaffected parents were heterozygous for each of the mutations. The patient's sister, who had the same genotype, had decreased serum potassium and decreased calcium excretion, but did not have any clinical symptoms. Ng et al. (2006) noted the intrafamilial variability and suggested a gender effect.|Among relatives of patients with Gitelman syndrome, Fava et al. (2008) identified 35 individuals who were heterozygous carriers of mutations in the SLC12A3 gene. Compared to unrelated matched controls, the heterozygous carriers had markedly lower blood pressure (systolic 103.3 vs 123.2 mm Hg; diastolic 62.5 vs 73.1 mm Hg; p less than 0.001). Although there were no significant differences between the groups in plasma concentration or urinary excretion rate of electrolytes, heterozygous mutation carriers had slightly higher fasting plasma glucose concentrations. Overall, the phenotype of heterozygous mutation carriers was similar to patients being treated with low-dose thiazide diuretics, suggesting that they are partially protected from hypertension through partial genetic loss of function of the SLC12A3 transporter. |
615962::generalized glucocorticoid resistance (GCCR) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the glucocorticoid receptor gene (NR3C1, GCCR; 138040) on chromosome 5q31.|Generalized glucocorticoid resistance is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by increased plasma cortisol concentration and high urinary free cortisol, resistance to adrenal suppression by dexamethasone, and the absence of clinical stigmata of Cushing syndrome. The clinical expression of the disease is variable. Common features include hypoglycemia, hypertension, and metabolic alkalosis. In females, overproduction of adrenal androgens has been associated with infertility, male-pattern baldness, hirsutism, and menstrual irregularities. Other features include chronic fatigue and profound anxiety (summary by Chrousos et al., 1983; Donner et al., 2013). |Vingerhoeds et al. (1976) reported a case of cortisol resistance. High levels of cortisol (without stigmata of Cushing syndrome), resistance of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis to dexamethasone, and an affinity defect of the glucocorticoid receptor characterized the disorder. Chrousos et al. (1982) restudied the family reported by Vingerhoeds et al. (1976). A man who was presumably homozygous had mineralocorticoid excess resulting in hypertension, hypokalemia, and metabolic alkalosis. One of his brothers, who had severe hypertension and died of a cerebrovascular accident at age 54, may also have been homozygous. Another brother and his son were apparently heterozygous; they showed slightly elevated 24-hour mean plasma cortisol levels and increased urinary free cortisol. Lipsett et al. (1986) provided further follow-up on the 4-generation family originally reported by Vingerhoeds et al. (1976). Autosomal dominant inheritance of glucocorticoid resistance was clearly demonstrated. Lipsett et al. (1986) believed that a mutation in the glucocorticoid receptor was responsible, although other explanations could be invoked. The single homozygote in the family was the proband; the other persons with elevated plasma cortisol levels and increased urinary free cortisol represented heterozygotes. The parents of the proband descended from families with consanguinity that occurred before the 16th century. The 2 parental families had lived in close proximity for many generations. This cortisol resistance is probably the rarest cause of treatable hypertension yet described. Affected mother and son with primary cortisol resistance and a reduction in glucocorticoid receptors were reported by Iida et al. (1985). |Bronnegard et al. (1986) described a woman with receptor-mediated resistance to cortisol as indicated by elevated 24-hour mean plasma cortisol levels and increased free urinary cortisol. Plasma ACTH concentrations were normal but she was resistant to adrenal suppression by dexamethasone. No stigmata of Cushing syndrome were present. The patient had symptoms of pronounced fatigue. Menopause had occurred at age 43. The patient's only child, a son, aged 29 years, had periods of inexplicable fatigue that had made him stay home from school and work. Because of the extreme fatigue that led to the mother's working only half-time, Addison's disease was suspected, but rather than hypocortisolism, elevation of urinary cortisol values was found. Bronnegard et al. (1986) found that the end-organ insensitivity to cortisol was not due to decreased concentration or ligand affinity of the receptor. The woman and her son instead showed an increased thermolability of the cortisol receptor, a phenomenon also observed with the androgen receptor in patients with the testicular feminization syndrome (300068).|Lamberts et al. (1986) described cortisol resistance in a 26-year-old woman with hirsutism, mild virilization, and menstrual difficulties. They thought that the abnormality was autosomal dominant because her father and 2 brothers had increased plasma cortisol concentrations that did not suppress normally in response to dexamethasone. No hypertension or hypokalemic alkalosis was present. The proband had male-pattern scalp baldness. |Nawata et al. (1987) studied a 27-year-old woman with glucocorticoid resistance. She was initially thought to have Cushing disease, based on high plasma ACTH and serum cortisol levels, increased urinary cortisol secretion, resistance to adrenal suppression with dexamethasone, and bilateral adrenal hyperplasia by computed tomography and scintigraphy; however, she had no clinical signs or symptoms of Cushing syndrome. Laboratory studies indicated that the patient's glucocorticoid resistance was due to a decrease in the affinity of the receptor for glucocorticoids and a decrease in the binding of the GCCR complex to DNA. |Charmandari et al. (2008) reviewed the clinical aspects, molecular mechanisms, and implications of primary generalized glucocorticoid resistance. They noted that the clinical spectrum is broad, ranging from asymptomatic to severe cases of hyperandrogenism, fatigue, and/or mineralocorticoid excess. Mutations in the GCCR gene resulting in the disorder impair glucocorticoid signal transduction and reduce tissue sensitivity to glucocorticoids. A consequent increase in the activity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis compensates for the reduced sensitivity of peripheral tissues to glucocorticoids at the expense of ACTH hypersecretion-related pathology. The study of functional defects of GCCR mutants highlighted the importance of integrated cellular and molecular signaling mechanisms for maintaining homeostasis and preserving normal physiology. |
138070::Renal glycosuria and hyperglycinuria without increased excretion of other amino acids were the features observed by Kaser et al. (1962) in 14 persons in 7 sibships of 3 generations of 1 kindred with probable autosomal dominant inheritance. |
606777::GLUT1 deficiency syndrome-1 (GLUT1DS1) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding the GLUT1 transporter (SLC2A1; 138140) on chromosome 1p34. Rare cases of GLUT1 deficiency caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SLC2A1 gene have been reported.Allelic disorders with overlapping features include GLUT1 deficiency syndrome with pseudohyperkalemia and hemolysis (608885), GLUT1 deficiency syndrome-2 (GLUT1DS2; 612126), dystonia-9 (DYT9; 601042), and idiopathic generalized epilepsy-12 (EIG12; 614847).|GLUT1 deficiency syndrome-1 is a neurologic disorder showing wide phenotypic variability. The most severe 'classic' phenotype comprises infantile-onset epileptic encephalopathy associated with delayed development, acquired microcephaly, motor incoordination, and spasticity. Onset of seizures, usually characterized by apneic episodes, staring spells, and episodic eye movements, occurs within the first 4 months of life. Other paroxysmal findings include intermittent ataxia, confusion, lethargy, sleep disturbance, and headache. Varying degrees of cognitive impairment can occur, ranging from learning disabilities to severe mental retardation. Hypoglycorrhachia (low CSF glucose, less than 40 mg/dl) and low CSF lactate are essentially diagnostic for the disorder. As more cases with GLUT1 deficiency syndrome were described, the phenotype was broadened to include individuals with ataxia and mental retardation but without seizures, individuals with dystonia and choreoathetosis, and rare individuals with absence seizures and no movement disorder. The disorder, which results from a defect in the GLUT1 glucose transporter causing decreased glucose concentration in the central nervous system, is part of a spectrum of neurologic phenotypes resulting from GLUT1 deficiency. GLUT deficiency syndrome-2 (612126) represents the less severe end of the phenotypic spectrum and is associated with paroxysmal exercise-induced dystonia with or without seizures. Correct diagnosis of GLUT1 deficiency is important because a ketogenic diet often results in marked clinical improvement of the motor and seizure symptoms (reviews by Pascual et al., 2004 and Brockmann, 2009). |De Vivo et al. (1991) described 2 patients with infantile seizures, delayed development, and acquired microcephaly who had normal circulating blood sugar, low to normal cerebrospinal fluid lactate, but persistent hypoglycorrhachia and diminished transport of hexose into isolated red blood cells. These symptoms suggested the existence of a defect in glucose transport across the blood-brain barrier. |Wang et al. (2000) used the designation GLUT1 deficiency syndrome for the disorder observed in 15 children who presented with infantile seizures, acquired microcephaly, and developmental delay and were found to have heterozygous mutations in the GLUT1 gene. The deficiency in the transporter resulted in reduced cerebrospinal fluid glucose concentrations and reduced erythrocyte glucose transporter activities in the patients. Rotstein et al. (2010) provided further details of a patient with autosomal recessive GLUT1 deficiency syndrome reported by Wang et al. (2000). He developed recurrent limb stiffening and cyanosis at age 6 weeks. Seizures included tonic eye deviation, staring spells, myoclonic jerks, and prolonged and refractory generalized tonic-clonic seizures. He had delayed psychomotor development and progressive microcephaly. CSF showed hypoglycorrhachia. A ketogenic diet was helpful with seizure control, but at age 6 years, his developmental quotient was 42. He had axial hypotonia, limb spasticity and dystonia, and severe ataxia. |Brockmann et al. (2001) reported a family in which GLUT1 deficiency presented in certain members with mild to severe seizures, developmental delay, ataxia, hypoglycorrhachia, and decreased erythrocyte uptake of 3-O-methyl-D-glucose. Seizure frequency and severity were aggravated by fasting, and responded to a carbohydrate load. Ultimately, however, the seizures and motor disability in the patients responded best to a ketogenic diet (Brockmann, 2009). |Klepper and Voit (2002) provided a detailed review of GLUT1 deficiency, including clinical features, a diagnostic algorithm, and effective treatment strategies. |Wang et al. (2005) found that 13 (81%) of 16 patients with GLUT1 deficiency syndrome-1 had the most common 'classic' phenotype, a developmental encephalopathy with infantile seizures, acquired microcephaly, and spasticity. Seizure type varied and included generalized tonic or clonic, myoclonic, atypical absence, atonic, and unclassified. Seizures were unresponsive to typical anticonvulsant medication, but responded rapidly to a ketogenic diet. Patients with the classic phenotype also experienced other variable paroxysmal events, including confusion, lethargy, hemiparesis, ataxia, sleep disturbances, and headaches. Cognitive impairment ranged from learning disabilities to severe mental retardation; some patients had impaired speech and language development. Neurologic signs showed variable involvement of the pyramidal, extrapyramidal, and cerebellar systems. |Zorzi et al. (2008) reported 3 unrelated Italian females with GLUT1 deficiency associated with paroxysmal movement disorders diagnosed in early adulthood. None had a positive family history. All had global developmental delay noted in infancy, and 2 had seizures beginning in the first 6 months of life (myoclonic absence and complex partial seizures, respectively). All had microcephaly, dysarthria, spasticity, and moderate mental retardation. Paroxysmal movements included myoclonic jerks, stiffening, and dystonic posturing. The phenotype in the 2 patients with early-onset seizures was consistent with GLUT1DS1; the other patient did not have seizures, but had ataxia, spasticity, dystonia, and dysarthria, more similar to the phenotype observed in GLUT1 syndrome-2 (612126). Genetic analysis identified a different heterozygous mutation in the GLUT1 gene in each patient (see, e.g., 138140.0014). Zorzi et al. (2008) noted that the abnormal movements were consistent with paroxysmal dyskinesia, thus expanding the phenotype associated with GLUT1 deficiency. |Hully et al. (2015) reported 58 French patients with SLC2A1 mutations identified in a large population-based study. Detailed retrospective clinical information was available for 24 patients. The patients came to medical attention at a median age of 7.5 months (range, 6 weeks to 5 years) for a combination of seizures (75%) with developmental delay or hypotonia (42%). Movement disorders were less prominent (29%) at disease onset. Seizures started between 1.5 months and 11 years, and usually included several types, the most common being focal seizures (52%) and atypical absence (87%). Other types included myoclonic (48%), generalized tonic-clonic (22%), and febrile (17%). Sensitivity to fasting or exertion was a prominent feature. Seizures tended to be refractory to medical therapy, but 79% of patients responded favorably to a ketogenic diet. Patients with myoclonic seizures had more severe intellectual disability. All patients had some sort of movement disorder, including dystonia (83%), chorea (25%), and ataxia (88%) with cerebellar kinetic syndrome (75%). Many movements affected the buccofacial area and eye movements. Almost all patients (92%) had both cognitive and motor impairment with variable intellectual disability; most had a friendly disposition. The phenotype tended change over time: epilepsy tended to decrease with age, while movement disorders and paroxysmal exercise-induced dystonia and dyskinesias worsened with age. Missense mutations were associated with a less severe phenotype. |Mullen et al. (2011) found that 4 (5%) of 84 probands with myoclonic astatic epilepsy (MAE) had a mutation in the SLC2A1 gene, consistent with GLUT1 deficiency. Three of the patients fulfilled the narrow definition of MAE, and 1 fit a broader definition. The first 3 patients had onset of multiple seizure types, including myoclonic-atonic seizures, by age 3 years, and subsequent cognitive decline, resulting in severe intellectual disability in patients 1 and 3. Patient 2, who was treated early with a ketogenic diet, had mild intellectual disability. The patient with the broader definition of MAE had onset at age 4 years of atonic and absence seizures, followed by a progressive epileptic encephalopathy and mild intellectual disability. Two of the patients also developed paroxysmal exertional dyskinesia in childhood. The findings were important because GLUT1 deficient patients can be treated with a ketogenic diet. Mullen et al. (2011) suggested that patients with MAE should be tested for GLUT1 deficiency. |
300908::nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia can be caused by mutation in the G6PD gene (305900) on chromosome Xq28.|G6PD deficiency is the most common genetic cause of chronic and drug-, food-, or infection-induced hemolytic anemia. G6PD catalyzes the first reaction in the pentose phosphate pathway, which is the only NADPH-generation process in mature red cells; therefore, defense against oxidative damage is dependent on G6PD. Most G6PD-deficient patients are asymptomatic throughout their life, but G6PD deficiency can be life-threatening. The most common clinical manifestations of G6PD deficiency are neonatal jaundice and acute hemolytic anemia, which in most patients is triggered by an exogenous agent, e.g., primaquine or fava beans. Acute hemolysis is characterized by fatigue, back pain, anemia, and jaundice. Increased unconjugated bilirubin, lactate dehydrogenase, and reticulocytosis are markers of the disorder. The striking similarity between the areas where G6PD deficiency is common and Plasmodium falciparum malaria (see 611162) is endemic provided evidence that G6PD deficiency confers resistance against malaria (summary by Cappellini and Fiorelli, 2008). |In primaquine-sensitive patients with hemolytic anemia, Carson et al. (1956) demonstrated an abnormality in the direct oxidation of glucose in red blood cells and deficiency of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase.|Cooper et al. (1972) and Gray et al. (1973) found that complete deficiency of G6PD produces not only nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia but also chronic granulomatous disease due to neutrophil dysfunction. The patient of Cooper et al. (1972) was a woman with complete leukocyte G6PD deficiency, partial deficiency in her red cells, and no family history of G6PD deficiency. Of the various possible explanations advanced by the authors, they preferred the suggestion that X-inactivation had affected the red cell and white cell series differently and that the patient indeed had G6PD deficiency. Gray et al. (1973) described 3 affected brothers. The mother showed an intermediate defect in leukocyte microbicidal and metabolic activity, as well as red and white blood cell mosaicism. |In Saudi Arabia, Mallouh and Abu-Osba (1987) reviewed the G6PD status of all children aged 1 month to 14 years who were treated for meningitis, septicemia, osteomyelitis, or typhoid fever during a 9-year period. The observed frequency of G6PD deficiency was significantly higher than expected for the entire group, for females with both catalase-positive and catalase-negative infection, and for males with catalase-positive infections. |Beutler (1994) pointed out that 35 years previously, William Demeshek, the first editor of the emerging journal 'Blood,' had invited him to write a review on 'The Hemolytic Effect of Primaquine and Related Compounds' (Beutler, 1959). Beutler (1994) attempted to put into perspective what had been learned in the 35-year interval and to touch upon what still needed to be learned. He provided a comprehensive tabulation of those G6PD variants that had been characterized at the DNA level as well as information on the population distribution of common G6PD mutations. He pointed out that the most dangerous consequence of G6PD deficiency is neonatal icterus. Kernicterus has been documented repeatedly in populations in which class 2 variants are common and is an important preventable form of mental retardation. Phototherapy has been used to reduce bilirubin levels and phenobarbital has been used prophylactically with some success. Exchange transfusion is required if the bilirubin exceeds 20 mg/dL. |Ninfali et al. (1995) studied muscle expression of G6PD in normal individuals and in persons with G6PD deficiency of 3 types. They were prompted to undertake these studies because of patients with symptoms such as myalgia, cramps, and muscle weakness under conditions of stress, particularly physical exertion. All 3 variants--Mediterranean (305900.0006), Seattle-like (305900.0010), and G6PD A- (305900.0002)--showed the enzyme defect in muscle. A statistically significant relationship was found in the activity of G6PD in erythrocytes and muscle of male subjects. The results suggested to the authors that, for a given variant, the extent of the enzyme defect in muscle can be determined from the G6PD activity of erythrocytes, using an equation that they derived. |Cocco et al. (1998) reported a mortality study of a cohort of 1,756 men with G6PD deficiency identified during a 1981 population screening in Sardinia and followed during the period January 1, 1982 through December 31, 1992. Outcome measures were cause-specific standardized mortality ratios (SMRs), which were computed as 100 times the observed/expected ratio, with the general Sardinian male population as the reference. Deaths from all causes were significantly less than expected due to decreased SMRs for ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, and liver cirrhosis, which explained 95.6% of the deficit in total mortality. All cancer mortality was close to the expectation, with a significant increase in the SMR for non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Increased mortality from non-Hodgkin lymphoma and decrease in mortality from liver cirrhosis were new observations. Decrease in mortality from cardiovascular disease may have been based on selection bias because the population screening was not random but was based on volunteers, who may have been more concerned than the average about their health. |In comparison with normal neonates, G6PD-deficient neonates experience a 2-fold increase in the prevalence of significant hyperbilirubinemia requiring phototherapy. Kappas et al. (2001) tested the efficacy of a single dose of intramuscular SN-mesoporphyrin, a potent inhibitor of heme oxygenase activity, in ameliorating jaundice in G6PD-deficient newborns in Greece. When compared with an untreated control group and a group of G6PD-normal newborns, a single dose of SN-mesoporphyrin shifted the peak plasma bilirubin concentration distribution to lower values, even in relation to normal neonates, and entirely eliminated the need for phototherapy. |The most common trigger for acute hemolytic anemia in G6PD-deficient individuals is favism, caused by ingestion of fava beans (Vicia faba). V. faba contains high concentrations of 2 beta-glucosides: vicine and convicine. On ingestion of fava beans, these glucosides undergo hydrolysis by glucosidases present both in the beans and in the gastrointestinal tract, releasing the respective aglycones divicine and isouramil, which are capable of triggering a favism attack. Favism occurs commonly only where the frequency of G6PD deficiency is relatively high and where fava beans are a popular food item, i.e., in southern Europe, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia. Favism may be life-threatening, especially in children (summary by Luzzatto and Arese, 2018). |That resistance to severe malaria (see 611162) is the basis of the high frequency of G6PD deficiency and that both hemizygotes and heterozygotes enjoy an advantage was established by Ruwando et al. (1995) in 2 large case-control studies of more than 2,000 African children. They found that the common African form of G6PD deficiency (G6PD A-; 305900.0002) was associated with a 46 to 58% reduction in risk of severe malaria for both female heterozygotes and male hemizygotes. A mathematical model incorporating the measured selective advantage against malaria suggested that a counterbalancing selective disadvantage, associated with this enzyme deficiency, has retarded its rise in frequency in malaria-endemic regions.|
229100::glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency is caused by compound heterozygous mutation in the FTCD gene (606806) on chromosome 21q22.|Glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder and the second most common inborn error of folate metabolism. Features of a severe phenotype include elevated levels of formiminoglutamate (FIGLU) in the urine in response to histidine administration, megaloblastic anemia, and mental retardation. Features of a mild phenotype include high urinary excretion of FIGLU in the absence of histidine administration, mild developmental delay, and no hematologic abnormalities (summary by Hilton et al., 2003). |In the 2 related Japanese patients reported by Arakawa et al. (1965, 1966), mental retardation was the main clinical feature. The ferric chloride test was positive due to formiminoglutamic acid in the urine. Other features were marked physical retardation, anemia, megaloblastic bone marrow, and biochemical evidence of disturbed folic acid metabolism. Very large amounts of FIGLU were excreted in the urine. The level of folic acid in the blood was increased. Hyperfolicacidemia followed histidine loading. Arakawa et al. (1965) observed hypersegmentation of the nuclei of neutrophils in 1 case. This may have been fortuitous association of an independent trait, since the father and his sister and mother showed the same finding but were otherwise normal. See Undritz anomaly (191500). Erbe (1977) suggested that mental retardation is not generally a feature of this benign condition, having been included as a result of ascertainment bias in the original studies of Arakawa. |Heterogeneity in this category is suggested by the report by Niederwieser et al. (1974) of 2 sisters who had FIGLU in the urine with normal serum folic acid levels. They differed from reported cases of postulated formiminotransferase deficiency in a 10-fold increase in FIGLU excretion with histidine loading, normal hematologic findings, normal serum folic acid, and lack of mental retardation in one. In a further study of the affected Swiss sisters, Niederwieser et al. (1976) postulated 'a practically complete deficiency' of formimino-L-glutamate:tetrahydrofolate-5-formiminotransferase. Their patients did not respond to folic acid. Perry et al. (1975) described similar patients. Rosenblatt (1987) preferred to call this condition glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency. |
610015::congenital glutamine deficiency is caused by homozygous mutation in the gene encoding glutamine synthetase (GLUL; 138290) on chromosome 1q25.|Congenital glutamine deficiency is a severe autosomal recessive disorder characterized by onset at birth of encephalopathy, lack of normal development, seizures, and hypotonia associated with variable brain abnormalities (summary by Haberle et al., 2011). |Haberle et al. (2005) described 2 presumably unrelated newborns of consanguineous Turkish ancestry who had congenital glutamine synthetase deficiency with severe brain malformations resulting in multiorgan failure and neonatal death. Glutamine was largely absent from their serum, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid. The first infant died on day 2. He had shortness of limbs, flexion contractures of elbows and knees, camptodactyly, ulnar deviation in hands, flat nasal root, short nose, anteverted nares, thin lips, and low-set ears. The second patient died in week 4. She showed generalized muscular hypotonia, enteropathy with voluminous diarrhea, necrolytic migratory erythema of the skin, and also had broad nasal root and low-set ears. |Haberle et al. (2011) reported a child, born of consanguineous Sudanese parents, with congenital glutamine deficiency. At birth, he showed generalized hypotonia, lower limb hyperreflexia, and soon developed seizures. He had severe developmental delay, apnea, recurrent respiratory infections, and episodes of bradycardia. He developed a transient severe epidermolytic rash. Laboratory studies showed hyperammonemia and decreased glutamine in serum and CSF. Brain MRI showed hypomyelination, thinning of the corpus callosum, and mild brain atrophy with prominent cortical sulci. He was alive, but severely handicapped, at age 3 years. |
231680::MADD, also known as glutaric acidemia II or glutaric aciduria II, can be caused by mutations in at least 3 different genes: ETFA (608053), ETFB (130410), and ETFDH (231675). These genes are all involved in electron transfer in the mitochondrial respiratory chain. The disorders resulting from defects in these 3 genes are referred to as glutaric acidemia IIA, IIB, and IIC, respectively, although there appears to be no difference in the clinical phenotypes.|Glutaric aciduria II (GA2) is an autosomal recessively inherited disorder of fatty acid, amino acid, and choline metabolism. It differs from GA I (GA1; 231670) in that multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiencies result in large excretion not only of glutaric acid, but also of lactic, ethylmalonic, butyric, isobutyric, 2-methyl-butyric, and isovaleric acids. GA II results from deficiency of any 1 of 3 molecules: the alpha (ETFA) and beta (ETFB) subunits of electron transfer flavoprotein, and electron transfer flavoprotein dehydrogenase (ETFDH). The clinical picture of GA II due to the different defects appears to be indistinguishable; each defect can lead to a range of mild or severe cases, depending presumably on the location and nature of the intragenic lesion, i.e., mutation, in each case (Goodman, 1993; Olsen et al., 2003). |The heterogeneous clinical features of patients with MADD fall into 3 classes: a neonatal-onset form with congenital anomalies (type I), a neonatal-onset form without congenital anomalies (type II), and a late-onset form (type III). The neonatal-onset forms are usually fatal and are characterized by severe nonketotic hypoglycemia, metabolic acidosis, multisystem involvement, and excretion of large amounts of fatty acid- and amino acid-derived metabolites. Symptoms and age at presentation of late-onset MADD are highly variable and characterized by recurrent episodes of lethargy, vomiting, hypoglycemia, metabolic acidosis, and hepatomegaly often preceded by metabolic stress. Muscle involvement in the form of pain, weakness, and lipid storage myopathy also occurs. The organic aciduria in patients with the late-onset form of MADD is often intermittent and only evident during periods of illness or catabolic stress (summary by Frerman and Goodman, 2001).|Importantly, riboflavin treatment has been shown to ameliorate the symptoms and metabolic profiles in many MADD patients, particularly those with type III, the late-onset and mildest form (Liang et al., 2009). |In the son of healthy parents from the same small town in Turkey, Przyrembel et al. (1976) described fatal neonatal acidosis and hypoglycemia with a strong 'sweaty feet' odor. Large amounts of glutaric acid were found in the blood and urine. The defect was tentatively located to the metabolism of a range of acyl-CoA compounds. A possibly identically affected child died earlier. |Lehnert et al. (1982), Bohm et al. (1982), and others described malformations with multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenation deficiency: congenital polycystic kidneys, characteristic facies, etc. |Typical clinical features of the disorder are respiratory distress, muscular hypotonia, sweaty feet odor, hepatomegaly, and death often in the neonatal period. Of the 12 previously reported cases reviewed by Niederwieser et al. (1983), 7 died in the first 5 days of life and only 2 patients survived to ages 5 and 19 years. |Harkin et al. (1986) described apparently characteristic and perhaps pathognomonic, cytoplasmic, homogeneous, and moderately electron-dense membrane-limited bodies in the central nervous system and renal tissues of a female patient who died at age 5 days. The kidneys were enlarged with numerous cortical cysts. Selective proximal tubular damage leads to glycosuria and generalized amino aciduria. The patient came from an inbred Louisiana Cajun community and had a sib who also died in the newborn period. |Patients with severe deficiency of the ETF dehydrogenase type have distinctive congenital malformations, whereas those with ETF deficiency do not; the severity of the metabolic block, rather than its location, and the resulting profound acidosis in utero may disturb normal morphogenesis. Colevas et al. (1988) described the pathologic findings in 2 cases. The pattern of lesions, in particular the striking localization of renal dysplasia to the medulla, suggested that the malformations may be the consequence of an accumulation of toxic metabolites that is not corrected by placental transfer. Other malformations included cerebral pachygyria, pulmonary hypoplasia, and facial dysmorphism. Lipid accumulation was demonstrated in the liver, heart, and renal tubular epithelium, all tissues that use fatty acids as a primary source of energy. |Wilson et al. (1989) found reports of malformations in 8 of 16 cases. The anomalies included macrocephaly, large anterior fontanel, high forehead, flat nasal bridge, telecanthus, and malformed ears. Abnormalities such as hypotonia, cerebral gliosis, heterotopias, hepatomegaly, hepatic periportal necrosis, polycystic kidneys, and genital defects were considered reminiscent of the anomalies in Zellweger syndrome, but elevations of glutaric, ethylmalonic, adipic, and isovaleric acids were considered distinctive for glutaric aciduria type II. Wilson et al. (1989) described a unique ultrastructural change in the glomerular basement membrane which they suggested may represent an early stage in renal cyst formation and provide a diagnostic criterion for glutaric aciduria II when enzyme studies are unavailable. |Poplawski et al. (1999) reported a family in which an unexplained neonatal death had occurred. Twelve years after the death, they retrospectively diagnosed multiple acyl-CoA-dehydrogenase deficiency by demonstrating an abnormal acyl-carnitine profile in the child's archived neonatal screening card, using tandem mass spectrometry. |Angle and Burton (2008) reported 3 unrelated infants with genetically confirmed MADD who experienced sudden acute life-threatening events in the first year of life, resulting in death in 2 infants. All had been correctly diagnosed via a newborn screening protocol. Each developed cardiopulmonary arrest concurrent with metabolic stress or limited caloric intake, including vomiting, upper respiratory infection, and rotaviral diarrhea. Although only 1 patient had a documented arrhythmia, Angle and Burton (2008) suggested that an intrinsic abnormality of myocardial function due to altered energy production may have played a role. The authors emphasized the importance of aggressive nutritional management in infants with MADD. |Hypoglycemia caused by inborn errors of metabolism, including disturbances of organic-acid metabolism, usually appear during infancy or childhood. Thus, the case reported by Dusheiko et al. (1979) was unusual. A 19-year-old woman had episodic vomiting, severe hypoglycemia, and fatty infiltration of the liver. The parents were not related. One of her sisters, at age 7, developed nausea, vomiting, and a 'stale' odor to the breath, and died after 3 days in hypoglycemic coma. At age 10, a second sister was found to have jaundice, hepatomegaly, and hypoglycemia after an acute febrile illness. She recovered from that illness but died 'in her sleep' 2 years later. Excess amounts of glutaric and ethylmalonic acids were found in the urine, consistent with defective dehydrogenation of isovaleryl CoA and butyryl CoA, respectively. These organic acids plus others are excreted in the urine in excess in Jamaican vomiting sickness, caused by the ingestion of unripe akee. Unripe akee contains the toxin hypoglycin, which inhibits several acyl CoA dehydrogenases. Cultured fibroblasts in the patient of Dusheiko et al. (1979) showed reduced ability to oxidize radiolabeled butyrate and lysine. |Mongini et al. (1992) reported a 25-year-old woman who complained of episodes of muscle weakness, nausea and vomiting since the age of 10 years. She had been born with bilateral cataracts and strabismus. Muscle biopsy showed free fatty acid accumulation. Low-fat diet reduced the episodes of muscle weakness. |Horvath et al. (2006) reported 3 unrelated patients with myopathy associated with coenzyme Q10 deficiency: a 32-year-old German woman who developed proximal muscle weakness during pregnancy; a 29-year-old Turkish man who developed difficulty walking and premature fatigue; and a 6-year-old Hungarian boy who had exercise intolerance and generalized hypotonia. All patients had significantly increased serum creatine kinase, increased serum lactate, myopathic changes on EMG, and hypo- or areflexia. None had myoglobinuria, ataxia, or seizures. Muscle biopsies showed lipid storage myopathy, respiratory chain complex deficiencies, and CoQ10 levels below 50% of normal. All 3 patients showed marked improvement after 3 to 6 months of oral CoQ10 supplementation. Gempel et al. (2007) reported follow-up on the patients reported by Horvath et al. (2006). The German woman had developed abnormal liver enzymes and recurrence of muscle weakness, and laboratory studies showed increased multiple acyl-CoA derivatives in serum. The Turkish man had proximal muscle weakness with scapular winging and waddling gait, and laboratory studies were consistent with MADD. Gempel et al. (2007) also reported 5 patients from 3 additional consanguineous families with late-onset MADD manifest as childhood-onset muscle weakness, muscle pain, and increased serum creatine kinase. All 7 patients responded favorably to riboflavin and/or coenzyme Q supplementation. Muscle biopsies showed a myopathy with lipid accumulation and small vacuoles; only 2 patients had ragged-red fibers. All had a decrease of respiratory complex I+III and II+III activity, and all had decreased muscle CoQ10 levels. Molecular analysis identified biallelic pathogenic mutations in the ETFDH gene in all patients (see, e.g., 231675.0007 and 231675.0008), thus confirming the diagnosis of MADD. Gempel et al. (2007) concluded that MADD due to ETFDH mutations can result in isolated myopathy with secondary coenzyme Q10 deficiency. |Liang et al. (2009) reported 4 Taiwanese patients from 3 unrelated families with MADD due to mutations in the ETFDH gene (231675.0003-231675.0005). There was marked phenotypic variability, even between 2 affected sibs with the same genotype. The first patient was a 27-year-old woman who had exercise intolerance since early childhood. In her teens, she developed several episodes of acute pancreatitis. At age 19, she developed dysphagia with progressive weakness of neck and proximal limb muscles, and later had a more severe episode of muscle weakness with acute respiratory failure, but no metabolic acidosis and hypoketotic hypoglycemia. Serum creatine kinase was elevated, and muscle biopsy showed increased lipid droplets predominantly in type 1 fibers. Urinary profile was consistent with MADD. Her older sister had a milder phenotype, with 2 bouts of muscle weakness and difficulty climbing stairs and combing her hair. She never had metabolic crisis, hypoketotic hypoglycemia, or respiratory failure. Laboratory studies showed low serum carnitine, increased serum acylcarnitine levels, and elevated glutaric, ethylmalonic, 2-hydroxylglutaric, 3-methylglutaconic, and lactic acids in urine. Both patients responded well to riboflavin and carnitine treatment. The third patient developed exercise intolerance, dysphagia, poor head control, and limb weakness at age 14 years, and was wheelchair-bound by age 16. He had neck and proximal muscle weakness with wasting, lordosis, winged scapula, and absent tendon reflexes. He did not have metabolic acidosis or hypoketotic hypoglycemia. Pulmonary function tests demonstrated a severe restrictive ventilatory defect. Muscle biopsy showed increased lipid droplets predominantly in type 1 fibers. He also responded well to riboflavin and carnitine treatment. The last patient was a 10-year-old girl who was a slow runner since childhood. She had an upper respiratory tract infection followed by progressive proximal muscle weakness. A few days after discharge from the hospital, her condition rapidly deteriorated and she developed fatal cardiopulmonary failure associated with marked metabolic acidosis, hyperammonemia, and hypoglycemia. |Lan et al. (2010) reported 7 Han Taiwanese patients with genetically confirmed MADD. The patients were identified retrospectively by review of muscle biopsies ascertained for lipid storage myopathy, and all were asymptomatic when recruited. The age at diagnosis ranged from 7 to 43 years, and the patients' ages at the time of the report were between 22 and 44 years. All had a history of episodic myalgia and limb weakness predominantly affecting the proximal muscles during an acute stage of myopathy. Four had dysphagia and 2 had respiratory failure. Serum creatine kinase was increased during the acute attacks. Three had 1 episode, whereas 4 had recurrent episodes. Four patients had extramuscular features, including encephalopathy, seizures, hypoglycemia, and heart failure in 1; vomiting and cardiac arrhythmia in 1; encephalopathy, liver function impairment and lactic acidosis in 1; and vomiting and liver function impairment in 1. All except 1 regained normal muscle strength after the acute stage. Trigger factors in some patients included prolonged fasting and exercise. Blood analysis showed increased acylcarnitines ranging from C8 to C16. Genetic analysis showed that 6 of the patients were homozygous for an A84T mutation in the ETFDH gene (231675.0003), and 1 was compound heterozygous for A84T and R175H (231675.0006). This patient also had a heterozygous substitution in the PNPLA2 gene (609059), which was not thought to contribute to the phenotype. |
231670::glutaric acidemia I (GA1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase (GCDH; 608801) on chromosome 19p13.|Glutaric acidemia I is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder characterized by gliosis and neuronal loss in the basal ganglia and a progressive movement disorder that usually begins during the first year of life (Goodman et al., 1995). |Hedlund et al. (2006) provided a detailed review of the clinical and biochemical aspects of glutaric acidemia type I. |Goodman et al. (1974) described glutaric aciduria and acidemia in a brother and sister with a neurodegenerative disorder beginning at about 6 months of age and characterized by opisthotonos, dystonia, and athetoid posturing. The glutaric aciduria was increased by oral administration of L-lysine, which is metabolized through glutaryl-CoA, and was decreased by reduced protein intake. Metabolism of radioactive glutaryl-CoA was deficient in white cells, a result compatible with inherited deficiency of glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase (Goodman et al., 1975). |Brandt et al. (1978) described a 10-year-old girl with progressive dystonic cerebral palsy. The urine contained large amounts of glutaric acid. From a review of this and 4 cases reported earlier, the authors concluded that disorders in the metabolism of organic acids should be sought in patients with progressive dystonic palsy. Lysed leukocytes from their patient showed severe impairment in the ability to metabolize glutaryl-CoA. |Amir et al. (1987) described 2 pairs of sibs with this disorder. All had a unique pattern of frontotemporal atrophy on computerized tomography (CT). Remarkably, in both sib pairs, 1 child was asymptomatic. All 12 previously reported patients had a homogeneous phenotype presenting in infancy with debilitating dystonia and choreoathetosis. |In an affected infant with glutaric aciduria, Mandel et al. (1991) described CT findings of dilatation of the insular cisterns, regression of the temporal lobes, with 'bat wings' dilatation of the Sylvian fissures and hypodensity of the lenticular nuclei. CT changes preceded the onset of symptoms by 3 months. Improvement in the temporal lobe atrophy was observed after a period of treatment, coincident with marked clinical improvement. |In 14 children with type I glutaric aciduria from the Old Order Amish community in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, Morton et al. (1991) noted a remarkably variable clinical picture ranging from acute infantile encephalopathy and sudden death to static extrapyramidal cerebral palsy. In 10 patients, the disorder was first manifest between 3 and 18 months during an acute infectious illness. Four of these children died in early childhood, also during acute illnesses. However, there had been little progression of the neurologic disorder after age 5 years in the surviving children, and intellect was usually preserved even in children with severe spastic paralysis. They suggested that restriction of dietary protein and limitation of protein catabolism, dehydration, and acidosis during illnesses may prevent the onset or progression of neurologic disease in Amish patients with this disorder. Morton et al. (1991) presented a pedigree chart tracing both parents of all except one case to John Lapp and his wife, who immigrated to the United States in the 1730s. The oldest patient was a 28-year-old man who was normal until age 3 months when, after a period of irritability and poor feeding on day 7 of a varicella infection, he experienced an acute, afebrile episode of tonic posturing and thereafter became flaccid and unresponsive. After recovery from the acute episode, which was diagnosed as varicella encephalitis, he was left with a residual spastic diplegia, partial bulbar palsy, and choreoathetosis. GA I was diagnosed based on a urinary glutaric acid level of 166 mg/g creatinine. Despite spastic diplegia and moderate choreoathetosis, he had normal intelligence and regularly worked in a carriage and harness repair shop. There had been no apparent progression of his neurologic disease since the single damaging illness at age 3 months. |Kyllerman et al. (1994) reported 12 new cases, aged 9 months to 16 years, comprising all known cases of GA I in Sweden and Norway. Ten had a severe dystonic-dyskinetic disorder, 1 had a mild hyperkinetic disorder, and 1 was asymptomatic. Two children died in a state of hyperthermia. Carnitine deficiency and malnutrition developed in patients with severe dystonia and dysphagia, which necessitated replacement therapy and gastrostomy. A slowly progressive dyskinetic disorder developed in 1 subject despite adequate early dietary treatment. Macrocephaly was found in 3. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance investigations in 10 showed deep bitemporal spaces in 7. Neuropsychologic testing of 8 of 12 subjects demonstrated receptive language function to be superior to expressive language and motor function, although cognitive functions were less affected than motor functions. A review of 57 pooled cases demonstrated that a severe dystonic syndrome developed in 77% and a mild extrapyramidal syndrome in 10%, while 12% were asymptomatic. |Hoffmann et al. (1995) presented the clinical findings in more than 21 patients with GCDH deficiency. Seventy-six percent of the patients presented with an acute encephalopathic crisis, mostly associated with an upper respiratory and/or gastrointestinal infection between the ages of 2 and 37 months. The metabolic symptoms, such as hypoglycemia and metabolic acidosis, were minimal. After recovery the children had lost most motor skills and functioned at a 1- to 2-month-old level. At that point, the very distinctive clinical picture of a severe dystonic-dyskinetic syndrome in alert-looking children with relatively well-preserved intellectual functions and a prominent forehead could be recognized. About one-fourth of the patients never suffered encephalopathic crisis but presented with subacute motor delay. These patients showed developmental delay from birth and a progressive dystonic 'cerebral palsy.' Hoffmann et al. (1995) observed that, whereas in most patients with GCDH deficiency there is often remarkable discrepancy between the severe motor impairment and the normal or near-normal intellectual functions until late in the disease process, children who never develop normally are more likely to be impaired mentally. Forty-three percent of this series showed macrocephaly at birth and 67% showed macrocephaly in infancy. Profuse sweating was noted in 35%. |Merinero et al. (1995) described 7 new patients with severe deficiency of glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase in cultured skin fibroblasts, only 3 of which excreted high levels of glutaric acid in the urine. High levels of glutaric acid were seen in the spinal fluid of all these patients. The patients presented between 6 months and 2 years of age with either seizures or hypotonia and dystonia. All but 1 had severe impairment of psychomotor development and abnormalities on T2-weighted MRI, chiefly bilateral hyperdensities of basal ganglia, atrophy of the temporal lobe, or extensive white matter hypodensities. |Bjugstad et al. (2000) performed a forward, stepwise, multiple regression analysis to find predictors for outcome in 115 previously described patients with glutaric acidemia type I. The analyses showed that in patients who did not have a precipitating illness before the first appearance of motor symptoms, the age at onset was significantly associated with the severity of motor impairments and overall clinical outcome. In patients who had a precipitating illness, the age at onset did not predict the outcome. In both groups of patients, basal ganglia degeneration, enlargement of spaces containing cerebrospinal fluid, and white matter abnormalities were indicative of a poorer prognosis. Treatment given after the appearance of symptoms was not associated with a better clinical outcome or fewer motor deficits. |In a discussion of the natural history of GA I, Strauss et al. (2003) commented that micrencephalic macrocephaly is a distinctive radiologic feature of GA I. In most neonates, an enlarged head circumference is the only presenting sign of the disorder. The authors pointed to radiologic signs of large fluid collections in the middle cranial fossae. Veins could be seen stretching tenuously across this space, where they are subject to distortion and rupture. Acute subdural hemorrhage can occur after minor head trauma and in some instances is accompanied by retinal hemorrhages. Investigation of child abuse preceded a correct metabolic diagnosis in some non-Amish children. |Strauss et al. (2003) summarized the clinical characteristics of 37 Amish and 40 non-Amish patients with GA I. Of the Amish patients, 17 were identified retrospectively and 20 were treated prospectively following diagnosis through screening of asymptomatic newborns. In all groups, basal ganglia degeneration was the major determinant of functional disability. The incidence of basal ganglia injury was 85% in non-Amish patients and 94% in retrospectively identified Amish children. In the other 20 Amish children, most of them diagnosed by neonatal screening, prospective management was accompanied by a basal ganglia injury rate of 35%. Acute striatal necrosis was the major cause of morbidity and mortality, and dystonia caused chronic medical and surgical complications. In older patients, exercise intolerance, hypoglycemia, and seizures often developed. Strauss et al. (2003) stated that fasting hypoglycemia probably has 2 distinct causes in GA I: nonketosis and hypoketosis. The former results from carnitine deficiency, which can also give rise to myopathy, cardiomyopathy, and Reye-like hepatocerebral crisis, and the latter can occur during intercurrent illness even in carnitine-supplemented children. |Bahr et al. (2002) reported a previously healthy 19-year-old woman who presented with recurrent headaches, oculomotor symptoms, and a severe leukoencephalopathy on MRI. Subsequent evaluation revealed increased urinary glutaric acid and compound heterozygosity for mutations in the GCDH gene. |Kulkens et al. (2005) reported 2 unrelated patients who developed neurologic signs at ages 35 and 15 years, respectively. The first patient had onset of headaches at age 35, developed tremor of both arms at age 50, and had 6 tonic-clonic seizures between ages 54 and 62. At age 63, he developed ataxia, progressive dementia, and speech problems. The other patient developed headache, vertigo, and gait disturbance at age 15 years following an upper respiratory tract infection. Both patients had macrocephaly from birth and showed supratentorial leukoencephalopathy. Genetic analysis confirmed glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency. Clinical treatment resulted in improvement and full recovery, respectively. |Despite early diagnosis, one-third of Amish infants with glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency developed striatal lesions that leave them permanently disabled. To better understand mechanisms of striatal degeneration, Strauss et al. (2007) retrospectively studied imaging results from 25 Amish patients homozygous for the 1296C-T mutation in GCDH (608801.0002). Asymptomatic infants had reduced glucose tracer uptake and increased blood volume throughout the gray matter, which may signify predisposition to brain injury. Striatal lesions developed in 9 children (36%): 3 had sudden motor regression during infancy, whereas 6 had insidious motor delay associated with striatal lesions of undetermined onset. Acute striatal necrosis consisted of 3 stages: (1) an acute stage within 24 hours of motor regression, characterized by cytotoxic edema within the basal ganglia, cerebral oligemia, and rapid transit of blood throughout the gray matter; (2) a subacute stage, 4 to 5 days after the onset of clinical symptoms, characterized by reduced striatal perfusion and glucose uptake, and supervening vasogenic edema; and (3) a chronic stage of striatal atrophy. Strauss et al. (2007) suggested that intravenous fluid and dextrose therapy for illnesses during the first 2 years of life was the only intervention that was clearly neuroprotective in these patients. |Marti-Masso et al. (2012) reported 2 adult Spanish sisters with onset in infancy of a severe progressive form of dystonia affecting the upper and lower limbs, face, neck, and trunk, and resulting in severe speech impairment and the inability to walk by the teenage years. Neither had macrocephaly, organomegaly, cognitive impairment, or acute encephalopathy in childhood. Whole-exome sequence analysis identified a homozygous mutation in the GCDH gene (V400M; 608801.0008), consistent with glutaric acidemia. Laboratory studies showed decreased long-chain acylcarnitines and high excretion of 3-hydroxyglutaric acid, but urinary glutaric acid excretion was normal. Brain imaging showed increased signals in the lenticular nuclei. The findings implicated mitochondrial fatty acid metabolism as an important pathway in the development of dystonia, and Marti-Masso et al. (2012) concluded that GCDH mutation analysis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of progressive forms of early-onset generalized dystonia. |
231690::glutaric aciduria III (GA3) is caused by homozygous mutation in the C7ORF10 gene (SUGCT; 609187) on chromosome 7p14.|Glutaric aciduria III is characterized by an isolated accumulation of glutaric acid. It appears to be a 'non-disease' as it is found in healthy individuals and is associated with inconsistent symptoms in others (summary by Marlaire et al., 2014). |Bennett et al. (1991) described an apparently 'new' peroxisomal disorder in a 1-year-old girl with failure to thrive and hematologic evidence of homozygous beta-thalassemia. The urinary finding of abnormal amounts of glutaric acid suggested the diagnosis of glutaric aciduria. Specific defects responsible for known forms of glutaric aciduria were excluded and the only abnormality found was lack of detectable activity of peroxisomal glutaryl-CoA oxidase in cultured skin fibroblasts. This patient was the first to be reported with glutaric aciduria caused by a peroxisomal rather than a mitochondrial dysfunction. The forms of glutaric aciduria that involve mitochondrial pathways are: type I (GA1; 231670) and 3 forms of type II (GA2; see 231680). The patient reported by Bennett et al. (1991) was the offspring of distantly related Pakistani parents. The level of urinary excretion of glutaric acid suggested that the flux through the peroxisomal pathway is considerably less than that through the mitochondrial pathway. Elevation of glutaric acid excretion in response to lysine loading suggested that lysine is a precursor. |Knerr et al. (2002) reported the clinical and biochemical phenotypes of 3 children with glutaric aciduria III. The first patient was a boy with dysmorphic features and a chromosomal deletion (monosomy 6q26-qter) in whom a persistent glutaric aciduria (500 mmol/mol creatinine, normal less than 10) was detected during a routine metabolic investigation. The second boy suffered from acute gastroenteritis and hyperthyroidism, when an excessively high urinary glutaric acid excretion was identified (1460 mmol/mol creatinine). The third patient was a girl with constantly elevated glutaric acid in her urine (290 mmol/mol creatinine) but no symptoms of significant disease. Knerr et al. (2002) excluded glutaric aciduria I, glutaric aciduria II, and secondary forms of glutaric aciduria in all these patients. Loading with the precursor amino acid lysine in all patients as well as with pipecolic acid in the third case led to an increase in urinary glutaric acid excretion, proving the endogenous origin of glutarate. Glutaric aciduria III, a defect reported to be caused by peroxisomal glutaryl-CoA oxidase deficiency, was their presumptive diagnosis. Knerr et al. (2002) reported that their cases confirmed the earlier assumption by Bennett et al. (1991) that glutaric aciduria III is not related to a distinctive phenotype. |Sherman et al. (2008) reported that in the process of screening 1,223 Amish infants for GA I, they identified 3 healthy children who excreted large quantities of glutarate but low 3-hydroxyglutarate, consistent with the phenotype of glutaric aciduria III. These children received no therapy and remained healthy over the more than 15 years that followed. |
266130::glutathione synthetase deficiency, or 5-oxoprolinuria, is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding glutathione synthetase (GSS; 601002) on chromosome 20q11. The same gene is mutant in hemolytic anemia due to glutathione synthetase deficiency of erythrocytes (231900).Also see 5-oxoprolinuria due to oxoprolinase deficiency (260005).|Glutathione synthetase deficiency, or 5-oxoprolinuria, is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized, in its severe form, by massive urinary excretion of 5-oxoproline, metabolic acidosis, hemolytic anemia, and central nervous system damage. The metabolic defect results in decreased levels of cellular glutathione, which overstimulates the synthesis of gamma-glutamylcysteine and its subsequent conversion to 5-oxoproline (Larsson and Anderson, 2001).|Jellum et al. (1970) discovered large amounts of pyroglutamic acid in the urine and plasma of a 19-year-old retarded Norwegian male. The chemical search was initiated because of unexplained chronic metabolic acidosis. Pyroglutamic acid was isolated by gas chromatography and identified by mass spectrometry; it is ninhydrin-negative. The patient showed spastic tetraparesis and a cerebellar disorder with intention tremor and dysarthria. Deficiency of 5-oxoprolinase in the kidney was suspected but not proved. Larsson et al. (1974) described 2 sisters, a neonate and a 3 year old, with pyroglutamic aciduria. Both had chronic metabolic acidosis requiring therapy with bicarbonate. Both showed increased hemolysis and marked decrease in glutathione in erythrocytes. Psychologic and somatic development of the 3 year old was normal, and she had no signs of neurologic damage. Marstein et al. (1976) studied a 24-year-old mentally retarded man who had demonstrated neurologic deterioration during the previous few years. Ataxia prevented his walking unaided. He developed epileptic seizures. Erythrocytes contained no detectable glutathione, and his glutathione synthetase activity was less than 2% of normal. The overproduction of pyroglutamate is probably caused by increased in vivo activity of gamma-glutamyl-cysteine synthetase, which in turn is caused by absence of normal feedback inhibition by glutathione with resulting superabundance of substrates available for gamma-glutamyl cyclotransferase. Lack of glutathione in the erythrocytes is apparently tolerable, but in nonrenewable neurons leads to serious neurologic problems of progressive nature. |Because of the observation of several episodes of neutropenia in a child with 5-oxoprolinuria, Spielberg et al. (1979) examined the response of neutrophils to oxidative stress associated with phagocytosis. Following ingestion of particles, the cells accumulated excess hydrogen peroxide compared with normal cells and showed impaired protein iodination and bacterial killing. |Robertson et al. (1991) described a 12-year-old girl with chronic metabolic acidosis, mental retardation, and psychotic behavior, as well as mild hemolytic anemia and peripheral retinal pigmentation abnormalities. A urine metabolic screen demonstrated 5-oxoprolinuria and further studies showed glutathione synthetase deficiency. The acidosis in the newborn period had been labeled renal tubular acidosis and treated with bicarbonate. |Divry et al. (1991) described a patient with a very severe neurologic presentation leading to fatal outcome in the first hours of life. |Manning et al. (1994) stated that approximately 20 cases of glutathione synthase deficiency had been reported and another 10 were known. The usual presentation had been neonatal acidosis and hemolysis with or without signs of neurologic damage. Some cases had not been diagnosed until adult life, however, reflecting a less severe form of the condition. |
307030::glycerol kinase deficiency (GKD) is caused by mutation in the GK gene (300474) on chromosome Xp21.|The infantile form of GK deficiency, or the 'GK complex,' results from the Xp21 contiguous gene deletion syndrome (300679) with congenital adrenal hypoplasia (300200) and/or Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD; 310200), whereas the juvenile and adult forms have isolated GK deficiency (Walker et al., 1996). |In a 76-year-old man, Goussault et al. (1982) found 'false hypertriglyceridemia' due to a 40-fold increased glycerolemia. Deficiency of glycerol kinase (11% of normal) was found in the leukocytes of the proband, and values of 48% and 100%, respectively, were found in a daughter and sister. Patients with the adult form of glycerol kinase deficiency are usually identified through hyperlipidemia testing. They have pseudotriglyceridemia because the large amount of glycerol in their serum is falsely identified as triglyceride. These adults have no apparent clinical problems. The pedigrees in all reported cases are consistent with X-linked inheritance. |Grier et al. (1989) described biochemical, clinical, and molecular genetic studies in a patient with isolated glycerol kinase deficiency. A low-fat diet resulted in dramatic clinical and developmental improvement. Molecular genetic studies with conventional Southern blot and PCR analyses showed no evidence of deletion.|Sjarif et al. (1998) studied 8 males from 3 families with isolated glycerol kinase deficiency. All except 1 had onset in the neonatal period or in early childhood. Four patients from 2 families were free of symptoms, 3 patients had gastrointestinal symptoms with ketoacidosis or hypoglycemia or both, and 1 patient had recurrent convulsions as the only acute sign, without evidence that it was correlated with a catabolic state. |
606664::glycine N-methyltransferase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the GNMT gene (606628) on chromosome 6p21.|Mudd et al. (2001) reported 2 Italian sibs, a 4-year-old girl and her 9-year-old brother, with a novel form of persistent isolated hypermethioninemia without cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency (236200), tyrosinemia type I (276700), or liver disease. The children exhibited elevations of plasma S-adenosylmethionine, but plasma sarcosine was normal. These observations suggested deficiency of glycine N-methyltransferase activity. The only clinical abnormalities in these sibs were mild hepatomegaly and chronic elevation of serum transaminases not attributable to conventional causes of liver disease. Augoustides-Savvopoulou et al. (2003) described an adopted Greek boy of Gypsy origin who presented at 2 years of age because of mild but persistent elevation of serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST). There was no hepatomegaly. Reevaluation at 4 years of age again showed elevated ALT and AST, whereas other routine laboratory values were normal except for a mild elevation of ferritin. Quantitative plasma amino acid assays showed a marked increase in methionine, and there was increased methionine excretion in the urine. Ultrasound of the liver showed increased echogenicity of periportal spaces only, and needle biopsy at age 5 years showed normal architecture of hepatic parenchyma without significant morphologic changes. Assays of metabolites related to methionine metabolism revealed striking elevation of plasma S-adenosylmethionine with minimal elevation of total plasma homocysteine and normal N-methylglycine, strongly suggestive of GNMT deficiency. The authors noted that this boy was similar to the sibs reported by Mudd et al. (2001) in having mild persistent elevation of serum transaminases without other serious clinical abnormalities; however, Augoustides-Savvopoulou et al. (2003) suggested that additional adverse effects might develop in the future in these young patients. |
259900::type I primary hyperoxaluria (HP1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGXT; 604285) on chromosome 2q37.|Primary hyperoxaluria type I is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by an accumulation of calcium oxalate in various bodily tissues, especially the kidney, resulting in renal failure. Affected individuals have decreased or absent AGXT activity and a failure to transaminate glyoxylate, which causes the accumulated glyoxylate to be oxidized to oxalate. This overproduction of oxalate results in the accumulation of nonsoluble calcium oxalate in various body tissues, with pathologic sequelae (Takada et al., 1990; Danpure et al., 1989; Williams et al., 2009) |Type II primary hyperoxaluria (HP2; 260000) is caused by mutation in the glyoxylate reductase/hydroxypyruvate reductase gene (GRHPR; 604296) on chromosome 9. Type III primary hyperoxaluria (HP3; 613616) is caused by mutation in the mitochondrial dihydrodipicolinate synthase-like gene (DHDPSL; 613597) on chromosome 10q24.|Williams and Smith (1968) were able to distinguish 2 distinct genetic disorders among cases of primary hyperoxaluria. The largest proportion of patients had glycolic aciduria and hyperoxaluria, marked reduction in metabolism of C14-labeled glyoxylate or glycolate to carbon dioxide, increased conversion of glyoxylate to urinary glycolate, and a defect of the enzyme-soluble 2-oxo-glutarate:glyoxylate carboligase. However, later work (Danpure et al., 1986; Danpure and Jennings, 1988) indicated that 2-oxo-glutarate:glyoxylate carboligase is probably the same gene product as the mitochondrial matrix enzyme 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH; see 203750); that the so-called soluble carboligase was probably an artifact caused by mitochondrial damage; and that in any case the latter is not deficient in this disorder. Williams and Smith (1968) found that another group of patients with primary hyperoxaluria excreted normal amounts of glycolic acid but large amounts of l-glyceric acid, more consistent with HP2. |Lindenmayer (1970) reported on 4 cases of oxalosis in 3 sibships. He traced 5 of the 6 parents to a common ancestral couple born in the 1700s. A useful review of published cases was provided. |Coltart and Hudson (1971) reported a girl with oxalosis in whom deposition of oxalate in the cardiac conduction system caused fatal heart block. |Boquist et al. (1973) reported a 46-year-old man with primary oxalosis who had onset of symptoms as an adult characterized by elevated levels of serum and urinary oxalic acid, as well as increased urinary excretion of glycolic and glyoxylic acid. He developed uremia and was treated with dialysis, but the disease progressed, with the appearance of polyneuropathy and peripheral ischemic changes leading to atrophy and gangrene. He died in uremia after 14 months of hemodialysis. Boquist et al. (1973) suggested that hemodialysis should not be utilized in patients with primary oxalosis. There was a family history of the disorder. Postmortem examination showed calcium oxalate deposits in the kidneys, including the glomeruli, interstitium, and tubular epithelial cells and lumens, myocardium, spongy bone, prostate, testes, striated muscles, aorta, inferior vena caval vein, and in numerous arteries and arterioles. The oxalate crystals were believed to be primarily formed intracellularly in the various organs. Additional findings were chronic pyelonephritis, degeneration of peripheral nerve fibers and perineural fibrosis. There was a family history of the disorder. The authors noted the unusually long survival of this patient. |Dennis et al. (1980) found that another complication of the disorder is peripheral vascular insufficiency resulting from spasm or arterial occlusion. Raynaud phenomenon, livedo reticularis, acrocyanosis, spasms of large arteries, gangrene and intermittent claudication have also been reported (Dennis et al., 1980); these are late complications in patients with uremia. |Morris et al. (1982) reported 3 infants with nephrocalcinosis and terminal renal failure due to oxalosis. All 3 had widespread oxalate deposition. Although biochemical evidence of primary hyperoxaluria was sought, the presence of severe renal failure and the lack of established normal values for urinary and plasma oxalate and glycollate in infants made the diagnosis difficult to establish. At least 1 patient appeared to have type I, since plasma glycolate was elevated. Morris et al. (1982) commented that it was unusual for primary oxalosis to display so early an onset and so rapid a course. |Chesney et al. (1983) reported a girl with HP1 who presented with renal failure at age 5 years and underwent bilateral renal transplants. A large radiopaque stone developed in 1 ureter after surgery. She had frequent pathologic fractures through large radiolucent areas that initially were interpreted as osteitis fibrosa cystica, but were found histologically to be areas of massive calcium oxalate deposition with localized histiocytic destruction of bone. The patient also had extensive soft-tissue calcification limiting motion in several joints. Material extruded from some of these deposits represented oxalates. Calcium oxalate crystals were extruded from under the patient's nails. |Danpure et al. (1989) reported 2 unrelated patients with HP1. One was a 16-year-old boy with a history of calcium oxalate kidney stones, hyperoxaluria, and hyperglycolic aciduria who had reached end-stage renal failure and was on dialysis. Residual AGXT activity was 8.7%. The second patient was a 33-year-old man with a milder form of the disorder, a history of calcium oxalate kidney stones, and a favorable response to pyridoxine treatment. Residual AGXT activity was 27.1%.|Small et al. (1990) examined 24 patients with primary hyperoxaluria and found that 8 had a crystalline retinopathy; 3 of the 8 also had optic neuropathy. |Theodossiadis et al. (2002) reported a 22-year-old man with type I primary hyperoxaluria who developed slowly progressive visual loss due to crystalline retinopathy. He then developed rapid, severe visual loss in both eyes. Fluorescein angiography confirmed the presence of choroidal neovascularization in both eyes at the edges of his previous macular scars. The authors concluded that mechanical factors from oxalate deposition may promote choroidal neovascularization. |
138900::serum uric acid concentration and susceptibility to gout can be conferred by variation in the ABCG2 gene (603756) on chromosome 4q22.|Gout is a common disorder resulting from tissue deposition of monosodium urate crystals as a consequence of hyperuricemia. Patients with gout experience very painful attacks caused by precipitation of urate in joints, which triggers subsequent inflammation. Elevated serum uric acid concentration is a key risk factor for gout (summary from Matsuo et al., 2009 and Woodward et al., 2011). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Serum Uric Acid Concentration Quantitative Trait Loci|See also UAQTL2 (see 612076), conferred by variation in the SLC2A9 gene (606142) on chromosome 4p; UAQTL4 (612671), conferred by variation in the SLC17A3 gene (611034) on chromosome 6p21; UAQTL5 (614746), associated with a SNP on chromosome 19q13; and UAQTL6 (614747), associated with a SNP on chromosome 1.|
603358::GRACILE syndrome is caused by homozygous mutation in the BCS1L gene (603647) on chromosome 2q35.|Fellman et al. (1998) described a neonatal metabolic disorder characterized by severe intrauterine growth retardation, fulminant lactic acidosis during the first days of life, Fanconi-type amino aciduria, and abnormalities in iron metabolism, including liver hemosiderosis. Affected infants failed to thrive, and they died neonatally or in early infancy. The disease was distinct from other lactic acidoses, neonatal hemochromatosis, and neonatal hepatitis. |
139250::Growth hormone (GH) is synthesized by acidophilic or somatotropic cells of the anterior pituitary gland. Human growth hormone has a molecular mass of 22,005 and contains 191 amino acid residues with 2 disulfide bridges (Niall et al., 1971). |
233910::tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)-deficient hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) B (HPABH4B) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding GTP cyclohydrolase I (GCH1; 600225). An autosomal recessive form of dopa-responsive dystonia with or without hyperphenylalaninemia is caused by mutation in the same gene.|Dopa-responsive dystonia-5 (DYT5; 128230) is an allelic disorder resulting from heterozygous mutations in the GCH1 gene.|For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of BH4-deficient hyperphenylalaninemia, see HPABH4A (261640).|Niederwieser et al. (1984) reported a 4-year-old girl with hyperphenylalaninemia, severe developmental retardation, severe muscular hypotonia of the trunk and hypertonia of the extremities, convulsions, and frequent episodes of hyperthermia without infection. Urinary excretion of neopterin, biopterin, pterin, isoxanthopterin, dopamine, and serotonin were very low, although their relative proportions were normal. Spinal fluid showed low concentrations of homovanillic acid, 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid, neopterin, and biopterin. Oral administration of L-erythro-tetrahydrobiopterin (but not the dextroisomer) normalized the serum phenylalanine level within 4 hours. No defect of the immune system was found. The patient's parents were first cousins, suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance. Liver biopsy showed a deficiency of GTP cyclohydrolase I. Phytohemagglutinin-stimulated lymphocytes of the parents showed levels of enzyme activity intermediate between zero (in the child's lymphocytes) and normal. |Naylor et al. (1987) made the diagnosis of GTP cyclohydrolase I deficiency in a 4-month-old infant in whom a positive Guthrie test for phenylketonuria (PKU; 261600) at birth led to institution of dietary therapy. Urinary pteridine screening for cofactor variants, however, revealed extremely low levels of both neopterin and biopterin. The diagnosis was confirmed by BH4-loading studies and assay of GTP cyclohydrolase I activity in the liver. |Ichinose et al. (1995) reported a female infant with BH4-dependent hyperphenylalaninemia due to GTP1 deficiency. She developed feeding problems, poor sucking, and poor muscle tone in the first week of life, and later showed delayed development. By the age of 2 years, she was unable to walk and developed seizures and choreoathetosis. Urinary pterins showed a profound deficiency in neopterin and biopterin. She died at age 10 years. |Blau et al. (1995) described a male infant in whom GCH1 deficiency was not detected in the newborn PKU screening program. The characteristic clinical phenotype developed at the age of 5 months: elevated plasma phenylalanine, undetectable urinary pterins, and absence of GCH1 enzyme activity in a liver biopsy. Developmental delay was first noted in the patient at 4 months of age. At that time, neurologic findings included generalized hypotonia and clonic movements. After 4.5 months, examination revealed developmental delay with generalized hypotonia and dystonic Parkinson-like movements with wide-ranging tremors, especially of the upper limbs and the head. When the patient was 9 months of age, BH4 and neurotransmitter replacement therapy was started, and the low-phenylalanine diet was stopped. One month later, a reduction in the intention tremors and dystonic movements was observed, but axial hypotonia persisted. When the patient was 15 months of age, after he had undergone therapy for 6 months, slight axial hypotonia persisted, but the intention tremors and the dystonic movements had completely disappeared. Administration of L-DOPA and 5-hydroxytryptophan was used to control the cerebrospinal fluid neurotransmitter levels.|Autosomal Recessive Dopa-Responsive Dystonia with or without Hyperphenylalaninemia|Furukawa et al. (1998) described a phenotype, which they called 'dystonia with motor delay,' that showed a severity intermediate between the severe autosomal recessive hyperphenylalaninemia with neopterin deficiency and the milder Segawa dystonia-parkinsonism with diurnal fluctuation (DYT5; 128230). In this intermediate phenotype, there is marked motor delay, but no mental retardation and only minimal, if any, hyperphenylalaninemia. Furukawa et al. (1998) reported a 6-year-old girl with dystonia with motor delay who was found to be compound heterozygous for 2 mutations in the GCH1 gene (600225.0010; 600225.0011). The maternal allele was also found in her mother, maternal grandmother, and great-grandmother, all of whom had progressive dystonia with diurnal variation. The second mutation was inherited from her asymptomatic father. The proband responded to treatment with tetrahydrobiopterin and levodopa. A second unrelated 17-year-old male with dystonia with motor delay was also found to be compound heterozygous for GCH1 mutations (600225.0012; 600225.0013). He could not walk until age 4, at which time language was normal except for mild dysarthria. Between the ages of 4 and 6 years, the patient's previously acquired motor and speech functions deteriorated, and he subsequently became wheelchair bound and mute. |Hwu et al. (1999) described a girl with progressive dopa-responsive dystonia with diurnal fluctuation beginning at age 2 years and 8 months. Plasma phenylalanine was normal. Genetic analysis identified a homozygous mutation in the GCH1 gene (R249S; 600225.0016). Both unaffected parents were heterozygous for the mutation. The data suggested that patients with recessive GCH1 mutations do not necessarily have hyperphenylalaninemia, although they can develop a movement disorder. |Nardocci et al. (2003) reported monozygotic twin girls who showed rigidity and tremors of the extremities, with diurnal fluctuation, from the first months of life associated with a homozygous mutation in the GCH1 gene (P199A; 600225.0022). One girl also had prolonged generalized dystonic spasms, with opisthotonus, hyperextension of lower limbs, and hyperpronation of the arms, also with diurnal fluctuation. Cognitive development was normal. At age 6 months, the girls showed delayed motor development with normal cognitive abilities, rigidity, irregular and arrhythmic hyperkinesias involving the limbs, and symmetric hyperreflexia without extensor plantar responses. Laboratory results were normal and neither had hyperphenylalaninemia. Treatment with L-DOPA resulted in marked clinical improvement, and both had almost normal neurologic examination at age 15, except for slight hyperreflexia and low-normal IQ. Neither parent had any signs or symptoms suggesting a GCH1 deficiency. Nardocci et al. (2003) interpreted the findings as expanding the clinical phenotype associated with recessive GCH1 mutations to include patients with neonatal onset of a movement disorder without hyperphenylalaninemia. |
139393::a mutation in the PMP22 gene (601097) on chromosome 17 was identified in a single family with the acute (AIDP) and chronic (CIDP) forms of inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy.|Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) is an acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy characterized most commonly by symmetric limb weakness and loss of tendon reflexes. It is a putative autoimmune disorder presenting after an infectious illness, most commonly Campylobacter jejuni, a gram-negative bacterium that causes acute enteritis (Yuki and Tsujino, 1995; Koga et al., 2005). Approximately 1 in 1,000 individuals develops GBS after C. jejuni infection (Nachamkin, 2001). |Although rare familial cases have been reported, GBS is considered to be a complex multifactorial disorder with both genetic and environmental factors rather than a disorder following simple mendelian inheritance (Geleijns et al., 2004). |Davidson et al. (1992) reported the disorder in a father and son. The father's illness was at the age of 58 years. He recovered completely after a 2-month hospitalization during which he was treated with plasmapheresis. The son was hospitalized 9 years later at the age of 43 years; he also was treated with plasmapheresis, with complete recovery in 3 months. Davidson et al. (1992) commented on remarkably similar HLA typing results in the father and son. |Yuki and Tsujino (1995) reported 2 Japanese sisters who developed GBS following C. jejuni enteritis. The 19-month-old sister first developed flaccid tetraplegia and areflexia without sensory impairment and later showed esotropia, dysphagia, dysarthria, and nuchal weakness. All symptoms began to improve after about 2 weeks, and she was able to walk without support at day 117. Her 3.5-year-old sister developed similar clinical features, as well as respiratory failure and absence of corneal reflexes. She became comatose at day 7. She regained consciousness on day 22 and slowly recovered muscle function and the ability to walk without support at day 166. Both children met the clinical criteria for GBS following culture-confirmed C. jejuni enteritis. |Geleijns et al. (2004) reported 12 Dutch families in which at least 2 members had GBS. Clinical features were variable, even within families. The most common manifestations were motor deficits, including limb weakness, ataxia, ophthalmoplegia, bulbar weakness, dysphagia, and ptosis, although many patients also had sensory deficits. Almost all had a prodromal infectious illness. Among sibs, the observed incidence was increased 2.6-fold compared to the expected incidence. There was also a trend toward decreased age at onset in younger generations. |
234500::Hartnup disorder (HND) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SLC6A19 gene (608893) on chromosome 5p15.|First described by Baron et al. (1956), this disorder is characterized by a pellagra-like light-sensitive rash, cerebellar ataxia, emotional instability, and amino aciduria. Scriver et al. (1985) suggested the existence of 2 forms of Hartnup disease: in the classic form the defect is expressed in both intestine and kidney; in a variant form it is expressed only in kidney. In the United States, cases of the full-blown clinical disorder are not seen, probably because of super-adequate diet.|Mahon and Levy (1986) reported on the childbearing experience in unrelated women with what they called Hartnup disorder and defined as an inborn error of neutral amino acid transport. Two living, unaffected offspring, born after untreated and uneventful pregnancies, one from each woman, had had normal development. This led Mahon and Levy (1986) to conclude that, unlike PKU, Hartnup disorder has no ill effects on the fetus. Normal ratios of amino acid concentrations between maternal and umbilical veins suggested that placental transport of free amino acids, unlike renal transport, is not reduced. |Nozaki et al. (2001) studied 2 Japanese families with first-cousin parents. The proband in the first family died of cirrhosis of the liver at the age of 42 years. Hartnup disorder was diagnosed on the basis of consistent patterns of monoamino-monocarboxylic aciduria and defects in the intestinal absorption of monoamino-monocarboxylic acids as determined by oral loading. He periodically had psychologic symptoms, ataxia, and diplopia. Niacin administration resolved these clinical symptoms. The patient was reported by Mori et al. (1989) as having no skin lesions. An older brother died at the age of 32 years of a progressive neurologic disease of unexplored pathogenesis. He was reported to have had mental retardation, periodic gait disturbances, and a skin rash on exposure to sunlight. A third son, younger than the other 2, had no health problems and was average scholastically in school. At age 33 years, large amounts of indican were found in his urine and he underwent oral amino acid loading showing decreased tryptophan absorption from the gut and suggesting that he was a Hartnup disorder carrier. In the second family, the proband had an eczematous skin rash at the age of 3 weeks and chronic diarrhea at the age of 3 months. Oral loading tests demonstrated impaired absorption from the gut, while the absorption of proline was intact. Liver biopsy showed extensive fatty liver without infiltration of inflammatory cells or fibrosis. |
140350::hawkinsinuria is caused by heterozygous mutation in the HPD gene (609695), encoding 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid dioxygenase, on chromosome 12q24. Homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the HPD gene causes tyrosinemia type III (276710).|Hawkinsinuria is an autosomal dominant inborn error of metabolism (Danks et al., 1975; Tomoeda et al., 2000). Metabolic acidosis and tyrosinemia are transient, and symptoms improve within the first year of life. Patients continue to excrete the hawkinsin metabolite in their urine throughout life. |Niederwieser et al. (1977) identified a new sulfur amino acid in the urine of a girl with prolonged tyrosinuria and her mother (reported previously by Danks et al., 1975). The new amino acid, called hawkinsin, was identified as (2-L-cystein-S-yl-1,4-dihydroxycyclohex-5-en-1-yl)-acetic acid. They postulated that hawkinsin originated from an intermediate in the 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate hydroxylase reaction (EC 1.13.11.27) and that mother and child were heterozygous for a defect in this hydroxylase system. The child presented at 20 weeks of age with failure to thrive and persistent acidosis. Her urine contained large amounts of 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid, 4-hydroxyphenylactic acid, and 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid. A diet specifically restricted in phenylalanine and tyrosine resulted in metabolic correction and rapid catch-up growth. After the age of 12 months tolerance for phenylalanine and tyrosine increased and was normal by 18 months. At age 6 years the girl was normal in all respects. |Wilcken et al. (1981) described 5 affected persons in 3 generations. The family was Australian but apparently unrelated to the previously reported cases. They confirmed dominant inheritance. The propositus became ill at 2 weeks of age when breastfeeding was discontinued. Regurgitation of feedings, irritability, tachypnea, and failure to thrive were problems. An unusual body odor 'like the smell of a swimming pool' was noted. At 6 months he was noted to be acidotic with enlarged liver. The hair was fair and stubby. Hemoglobin was 8.9 gm% and the blood smear showed anisocytosis, spherocytosis, and polychromasia. Hawkinsin and 4-hydroxycyclohexylacetic acid (4-HCAA) were found in the urine of the sister, mother, maternal aunt and maternal grandfather. All had been breast-fed as babies to ages 8 to 12 months, and none had had untoward symptoms. Wilcken et al. (1981) concluded that hawkinsinuria appears to be an inborn error of metabolism in which the accumulation of a toxic metabolite occurs when the normal conjugation capacities are exceeded. Their findings also supported a role of glutathione in detoxification of a highly reactive intermediate metabolite formed during the 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase reaction. |Borden et al. (1992) described 2 affected families in the United States. In one family, expression of the gene was traced through 3 generations. Metabolic acidosis and failure to thrive appeared to be confined to infancy. Tyrosyl metabolites and 5-oxoproline were also found in the urine in infancy only. One child presented with failure to thrive and fine, sparse hair with persistent metabolic acidosis. Upon confirmation of the diagnosis of hawkinsinuria at 8 months, she was given a protein-restricted diet, following which she improved greatly. |Lehnert et al. (1999) described a 10.5-year-old male patient, the third child of a nonconsanguineous Austrian couple, who was followed from birth. The diagnosis of hawkinsinuria was established at the age of 3 years and 8 months, after a first misdiagnosis of fructose intolerance. Symptoms started after weaning from breast milk at the age of 3 months with recurrent vomiting, inappetence, and failure to thrive. Investigations during several hospital admissions revealed renal tubular acidosis of unknown cause, unclear hepatopathy, prolonged tyrosyluria, and 5-oxoprolinuria during acute illness. Despite initial severe failure to thrive and microcephaly, symptoms resolved gradually without specific treatment and the patient was described as physically and mentally normal at the time of report. Investigation of the parents and the 2 sisters did not detect any metabolic abnormalities, consistent with the possibility of a new mutation. |
235200::hemochromatosis type 1 (HFE1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the HFE gene (613609) on chromosome 6p22.|Hereditary hemochromatosis is an autosomal recessive disorder of iron metabolism wherein the body accumulates excess iron (summary by Feder et al., 1996). Excess iron is deposited in a variety of organs leading to their failure, and resulting in serious illnesses including cirrhosis, hepatomas, diabetes, cardiomyopathy, arthritis, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Severe effects of the disease usually do not appear until after decades of progressive iron loading. Removal of excess iron by therapeutic phlebotomy decreases morbidity and mortality if instituted early in the course of the disease. Classic hemochromatosis (HFE) is most often caused by mutation in a gene designated HFE on chromosome 6p21.3. |Adams and Barton (2007) reviewed the clinical features, pathophysiology, and management of hemochromatosis. |Genetic Heterogeneity of Hemochromatosis|At least 4 additional iron overload disorders labeled hemochromatosis have been identified on the basis of clinical, biochemical, and genetic characteristics. Juvenile hemochromatosis, or hemochromatosis type 2 (HFE2), is autosomal recessive and is divided into 2 forms: HFE2A (602390), caused by mutation in the HJV gene (608374) on chromosome 1q21, and HFE2B (613313), caused by mutation in the HAMP gene (606464) on chromosome 19q13. Hemochromatosis type 3 (HFE3; 604250), an autosomal recessive disorder, is caused by mutation in the TFR2 gene (604720) on chromosome 7q22. Hemochromatosis type 4 (HFE4; 606069), an autosomal dominant disorder, is caused by mutation in the SLC40A1 gene (604653) on chromosome 2q32. Hemochromatosis type 5 (HFE5; 615517) is caused by mutation in the FTH1 gene (134770) on chromosome 11q12.|Muir et al. (1984) recognized 4 different types of hereditary hemochromatosis which 'bred true' in families, suggesting that more than one genetic lesion in iron metabolism can lead to hereditary hemochromatosis. Group I was termed the classic form with elevated transferrin (190000) saturation, serum ferritin levels, and liver iron content; group II was characterized by severe iron overload and accelerated disease manifesting at an early age; group III was characterized by elevated total body iron stores, normal transferrin saturation and serum ferritin levels; and group IV was characterized by markedly elevated findings on serum biochemical tests, i.e., transferrin saturation and serum ferritin, with minimal elevation in total body iron stores. Milman et al. (1992) found no relationship between genetic subtypes of transferrin and the expression of disease in hemochromatosis patients.|Edwards et al. (1980) identified 35 hemochromatosis homozygotes through pedigree studies, using the close linkage to HLA-A (142800) in the identification. Thirteen were asymptomatic. Arthropathy was present in 20, hepatomegaly in 19, transaminasemia in 16, skin pigmentation in 15, splenomegaly in 14, cirrhosis in 14, hypogonadism in 6, and diabetes in 2. None had congestive heart failure. Only 1 had the triad of hepatomegaly, hyperpigmentation, and diabetes. Serum iron was increased in 30 of 35, transferrin saturation was increased in all 35, serum ferritin in 23 of 32, urinary iron excretion after deferoxamine in 28 of 33, hepatic parenchymal cell stainable iron in 32 of 33, and hepatic iron in 27 of 27. Iron loading was 2.7 times greater in men than in women. No female had hepatic cirrhosis. |By studying 1,058 individuals who were heterozygous for the HLA-linked hemochromatosis mutation, Bulaj et al. (1996) found that the mean serum iron concentrations and transferrin-saturation values were higher in heterozygotes than in normal subjects and did not increase with age. Initial transferrin-saturation levels exceeding the threshold associated with the homozygous genotype were found in 4% of males and 8% of female heterozygotes. The geometric mean serum ferritin concentration was higher in heterozygotes than in normal subjects and increased with age. Higher-than-normal values were found in 20% of males and 8% of female heterozygotes. The clinical and biochemical expression of hemochromatosis was more marked in heterozygotes with paternally transmitted mutations than in those with maternally transmitted mutations. Liver biopsy abnormalities were generally associated with alcohol abuse, hepatitis, or porphyria cutanea tarda. Bulaj et al. (1996) concluded that complications due to iron overload alone in hemochromatosis heterozygotes are 'extremely rare.' This was the first description of parent-of-origin effects in hemochromatosis. |Escobar et al. (1987) established the diagnosis of hemochromatosis in a 7-year-old boy and his 29-month-old brother. These were said to be the youngest children with primary hemochromatosis reported to that time. They were members of a family in which 3 generations had affected individuals. Data from the literature on values of serum iron, serum ferritin, transferrin saturation, and hepatic iron were reviewed. Kaikov et al. (1992) described hemochromatosis in asymptomatic sibs in whom the diagnosis was made after an unexpected finding of elevated serum iron concentrations. The sibs were 7, 6, and 4 years of age. Elevated red cell mean corpuscular volume (MCV) was elevated in all 3, at 90 to 92 fL. In their review of the literature, they found 16 cases of symptomatic homozygous children at ages ranging from 4 to 19 years at the time of diagnosis. They suggested that normalization of the MCV may be an indirect index of adequate phlebotomy. The cases of Escobar et al. (1987) and Kaikov et al. (1992) may have been juvenile hemochromatosis (602390). |Roldan et al. (1998) described acute liver failure after iron supplementation in a 29-year-old woman with unrecognized hemochromatosis.|Roy and Andrews (2001) reviewed disorders of iron metabolism, with emphasis on aberrations in hemochromatosis, Friedreich ataxia (FRDA; 229300), aceruloplasminemia (604290), and other inherited disorders. |McDermott and Walsh (2005) assessed the prevalence of hypogonadism in a large group of patients with hemochromatosis diagnosed in a single center over a 20-year period. Abnormally low plasma testosterone levels, with low luteinizing hormone (LH; see 152780) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH; see 136530) levels, were found in 9 of 141 (6.4%) male patients tested. Eight of nine (89%) had associated hepatic cirrhosis; 3 of 9 (33%) had diabetes. Inappropriately low LH and FSH levels were found in 2 of 38 females (5.2%) in whom the pituitary-gonadal axis could be assessed. McDermott and Walsh (2005) concluded that patients with lesser degrees of hepatic siderosis at diagnosis are unlikely to develop hypogonadism. |Liver Cirrhosis and Liver Cancer|Deugnier et al. (1993) analyzed the occurrence of primary liver cancer in hemochromatosis; there was 1 instance of cholangiocarcinoma and 53 instances of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC; 114550). Of the 54 patients, 32 were untreated and 22 had been 'de-ironed.' Three of the patients had hepatocellular carcinoma in noncirrhotic but only fibrotic liver. Chronic alcoholism and tobacco smoking was higher in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma than in matched hemochromatosis patients without carcinoma. |A common manifestation of tissue damage caused by iron accumulation in hereditary hemochromatosis is hepatic cirrhosis that may lead to hepatocellular carcinoma. Willis et al. (2000) determined the risk of developing such disease manifestations in individuals with HFE mutations in Norfolk, UK. The frequency of mutant HFE alleles in archived liver tissue blocks from patients with cirrhosis or liver cancer was compared with that in 1,000 control blood samples. This control group was derived from a number of sources; no sample was from an individual with diagnosed HH. Of 34 cases of liver cancer, 3 (8.8%) were homozygous for the C282Y (613609.0001) mutation (2 hepatocellular carcinomas, 1 undifferentiated liver carcinoma). None of these patients had been given a diagnosis of HH prior to the diagnosis of liver cancer. None were C282Y/H63D (613609.0002) compound heterozygotes. Five of 190 cirrhosis samples (2.6%) were homozygous for C282Y; 4 of these patients had been given a clinical diagnosis of HH at the time of biopsy, and the remaining case fell also into the liver cancer group. Six cirrhosis samples were from C282Y/H63D compound heterozygotes; none had been given a clinical diagnosis of HH. The frequency of C282Y homozygotes in the control group was 1 in 230, and of C282Y/H63D compound heterozygotes was 1 in 108. HFE mutations were significantly more common in disease than in control specimens. Willis et al. (2000) calculated that, in their population, 2.7% of C282Y homozygotes and 1% of C282Y/H63D compound heterozygotes develop liver disease at some point in their lives. |Both Wilson disease (WND; 277900) and hemochromatosis, characterized by excess hepatic deposition of iron and copper, respectively, produce oxidative stress and increase the risk of liver cancer. Because the frequency of p53 mutated alleles (191170) in nontumorous human tissue may be a biomarker of oxyradical damage and identify individuals at increased cancer risk, Hussain et al. (2000) determined the frequency of p53 mutated alleles in nontumorous liver tissue from WND and hemochromatosis patients. When compared with the liver samples from normal controls, higher frequencies of G:C to T:A transversions at codon 249, and C:G to A:T transversions and C:G to T:A transitions at codon 250 were found in liver tissue from WND cases, and a higher frequency of G:C to T:A transversions at codon 249 was also found in liver tissue from hemochromatosis cases. Sixty percent of WND and 28% of hemochromatosis cases also showed a higher expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase in the liver, which suggested nitric oxide as a source of increased oxidative stress. The results were consistent with the hypothesis that the generation of oxygen/nitrogen species and unsaturated aldehydes from iron and copper overload in hemochromatosis and WND causes mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor gene. |
235400::susceptibility to the development of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome-1 (AHUS1) can be conferred by variation in the gene encoding complement factor H (CFH; 134370) on chromosome 1q31.|Deficiency of the CFH-related proteins CFHR1 (134371) and CFHR3 (605336) may be associated with development of the disorder due to autoantibodies. Other genes may play a role in modifying the phenotype (see MOLECULAR GENETICS).|HUS can share overlapping clinical features with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP; 274150), which is caused by mutation in the von Willebrand factor-cleaving protease (VWFCP) gene (ADAMTS13; 604134).|Typical hemolytic uremic syndrome is characterized by acute renal failure, thrombocytopenia, and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia associated with distorted erythrocytes ('burr cells'). The vast majority of cases (90%) are sporadic, occur in children under 3 years of age, and are associated with epidemics of diarrhea caused by verotoxin-producing E. coli. The death rate is very low, about 30% of cases have renal sequelae, and there is usually no relapse of the disease. This form of HUS usually presents with a diarrhea prodrome (thus referred to as D+HUS) and has a good prognosis in most cases. In contrast, a subgroup of patients with HUS have an atypical presentation (aHUS or D-HUS) without a prodrome of enterocolitis and diarrhea and have a much poorer prognosis, with a tendency to relapse and frequent development of end-stage renal failure or death. These cases tend to be familial. Both autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant inheritance have been reported (Goodship et al., 1997; Taylor, 2001; Veyradier et al., 2003; Noris et al., 2003). Noris and Remuzzi (2009) provided a detailed review of atypical HUS. |Genetic Heterogeneity of Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome|Atypical HUS is a genetically heterogeneous condition. Susceptibility to the development of the disorder can be conferred by mutations in various components of or regulatory factors in the complement cascade system (Jozsi et al., 2008). See AHUS2 (612922), AHUS3 (612923), AHUS4 (612924), AHUS5 (612925), and AHUS6 (612926). AHUS7 (see 615008) is caused by mutation in the DGKE gene (601440), which is not part of the complement cascade system. |Hagge et al. (1967) reported the hemolytic uremic syndrome in 2 sibs. Features included intravascular hemolysis, thrombocytopenia, and azotemia. One had repeated attacks ending in renal failure and death at age 8 years; the other recovered completely after one attack. Chan et al. (1969) reported HUS in 2 adopted, unrelated sibs. |Kaplan et al. (1975) reported HUS in 3 sibs and reviewed reports of 21 sibships with 2 or more affected individuals. Two groups of families could be identified among 41 analyzed. Sibs whose onset was within a short time of each other had a relatively good prognosis (19% mortality). Those whose onset was more than a year apart had a poorer prognosis (68% mortality). Kaplan et al. (1975) suggested that an environmental agent was causative in the first group and that genetic factors were important in the second. Most of the first group of families came from an endemic area, whereas most of the second group came from a nonendemic area. |Blattler et al. (1975) studied a family in which 4 sibs had died from HUS. The parents and 4 surviving sibs had normal renal function and normal platelet and fibrinogen survival. The mother and 3 sibs had an increased percentage of megathrombocytes. Two of them showed renal accumulation of Cr 51-platelet radioactivity and ultrastructural changes of the endothelium on renal biopsy. |Edelsten and Tuck (1978) reported a family with HUS inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.|Thompson and Winterborn (1981) reported an 8-month-old Asian boy with very low levels of plasma factor H who presented with the hemolytic uremic syndrome. Complement component C3 (120700) was also depleted. A healthy 3-year-old brother had the same complement profile, suggesting activation of the alternative complement pathway. The parents, who were first cousins, had half-normal levels of factor H. |Kirchner et al. (1982) described this disorder in mother and daughter. The daughter's illness, characterized primarily by renal insufficiency, was most compatible with adult hemolytic uremic syndrome and the mother's illness, with prominent neurologic findings, was most compatible with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Merrill et al. (1985) reported 2 certain cases and 3 possible case in 2 generations of a North Carolina black family. |Neuhaus et al. (1997) reported clinical features of atypical D-HUS in 23 children. Features included requirement for dialysis (74%), hypertension (43%), cardiomyopathy (43%), and cerebral convulsions (48%). Only 5 patients (26%), including 4 infants, recovered completely. Six patients (32%) had 1 to 10 recurrences and 8 (42%) developed end-stage renal failure. Four children died. |Warwicker et al. (1998) reported a 36-year-old man with sporadic relapsing aHUS. He had anemia, thrombocytopenia, hypertension, and acute renal failure. Renal biopsy showed a thrombotic microangiopathy and deposition of complement component C3 in vessel walls. He had half-normal serum levels of factor H and decreased levels of C3, consistent with activation of the alternative complement pathway. HUS recurred after renal transplantation. Molecular analysis revealed a heterozygous 4-bp deletion in the CFH gene (134370.0011). |Ohali et al. (1998) reported a large consanguineous Bedouin family in which 10 infants had atypical HUS characterized by microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, acute renal failure, severe hypertension, edema, and increased serum triglycerides. All had very early onset with a median presentation at age 2 weeks. Two patients died during the first disease episode; the remaining 8 patients had a mean number of 4 relapses despite treatment. In total, 8 patients died at ages 3 weeks to 10 months. Factor H levels were low to undetectable in all 4 patients studied, and C3 levels were decreased in 9 of 10 infants tested. Four kidney biopsies showed marked arteriolar changes, including stenosis, edema, and thickening of the intima. Glomerular changes included swelling of endothelial cells with microvillus transformation and proliferation of mesangial cells with increased matrix deposition in the mesangium. Other changes included fibrotic changes in glomeruli and the tubulointerstitium, as well as C3 deposition in capillary walls. |Rougier et al. (1998) reported 6 children with complement factor H deficiency and acute glomerular disease. Five of the 6 children presented with hemolytic uremic syndrome. Two of the children were from a consanguineous family from Turkey and exhibited a homozygous deficiency characterized by absence of the 150-kD form of factor H. |Noris et al. (2003) reported a 21-year-old woman and her affected brother. Disease onset in the sister (the proband) was at age 16 months, when she developed fever, hemolytic anemia, and thrombocytopenia. At the time, renal function was normal. Thereafter she had 6 recurrences of thrombotic microangiopathy, all associated with deteriorating renal function. Treatment consisted of plasma exchange and infusions, steroids, and blood transfusions, which led to complete recovery of blood abnormalities and renal function. The last episode occurred at age 20 years and was characterized by anemia, thrombocytopenia, and severe impairment of renal function. Renal biopsy showed irreversible changes of chronic nephropathy with typical features of HUS, including diffuse narrowing/occlusion of vessels and severe glomerular ischemia. At the age of 21 years she was on chronic dialysis. The proband's brother had 2 episodes of HUS at age 9 years. Both were characterized by severe hemolytic anemia and acute renal insufficiency and resolved without plasma treatment, with no renal sequelae. |
114550::somatic mutations in a number of different genes have been identified in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and hepatoblastoma. These include TP53 (191170), MET (164860), CTNNB1 (116806), PIK3CA (171834), AXIN1 (603816), and APC (611731).|See 142330 for familial hepatic adenoma, sometimes associated with hepatocellular carcinoma.|Hepatocellular carcinoma is the major histologic type of malignant primary liver neoplasm. It is the fifth most common cancer and the third most common cause of death from cancer worldwide. The major risk factors for HCC are chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, prolonged dietary aflatoxin exposure, alcoholic cirrhosis, and cirrhosis due to other causes. Hepatoblastomas comprise 1 to 2% of all malignant neoplasms of childhood, most often occurring in children under 3 years of age. Hepatoblastomas are thought to be derived from undifferentiated hepatocytes (Taniguchi et al., 2002). |Primary cancer of the liver in 3 brothers was described by Kaplan and Cole (1965) and by Hagstrom and Baker (1968). In these patients there was no recognized preexisting liver disease. Denison et al. (1971) described 2 adult brothers who died of primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Both had micronodular cirrhosis with features of subacute progressive viral hepatitis. Australia antigen was demonstrated in the brother in whom it was sought. Their father had died much earlier of hepatocellular carcinoma. |Hepatoblastoma has been described in sibs (Fraumeni et al., 1969; Napoli and Campbell, 1977; Ito et al., 1987). |See 231100 for description of liver cancer as a complication of giant cell hepatitis of infancy. Familial liver cell carcinoma might also have its explanation in alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency (613490), hemochromatosis (235200), and tyrosinemia (276700).|
121300::hereditary coproporphyria (HCP) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the CPOX gene (612732) on chromosome 3q12. Harderoporphyria is a distinctive subtype of HCP, caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the CPOX gene.|Hereditary coproporphyria, an acute hepatic porphyria, is characterized by acute attacks of neurologic dysfunction often provoked by drugs, fasting, menstrual cycle, or infectious diseases. Skin photosensitivity may also be present. Inheritance is usually autosomal dominant, but autosomal recessive inheritance can also occur. Excretion of large amounts of coproporphyrin III, mostly in feces and urine, is observed. Harderoporphyria is a rare homozygous erythropoietic variant form of HCP, characterized by neonatal hemolytic anemia, sometimes accompanied by skin lesions, and massive excretion of harderoporphyrin in feces. During childhood and adulthood, a mild residual anemia is chronically observed (review by Schmitt et al., 2005). |The first case of coproporphyria, reported by Berger and Goldberg (1955), was the offspring of first-cousin parents, both of whom showed excessive excretion of coproporphyrin III. The authors suggested that the disorder is autosomal dominant and that their proband was homozygous. |Barnes and Whittaker (1965) described 4 of 5 sibs who were affected. The parents were not tested. Marked elevation of coproporphyria in the feces differentiated the condition from acute intermittent porphyria (AIP; 176000) in which stool porphyrins are usually normal and from variegate porphyria (VP; 176200) in which both coproporphyrin and protoporphyrin fractions are increased in the stool. The proband experienced typical acute porphyria. Constipation and abdominal colic were striking features in these patients. |Goldberg et al. (1967) added 20 new cases. A massive excretion of coproporphyrin III in the urine and predominantly in the feces was demonstrated. Attacks resembling those of AIP were precipitated by drugs, and during attacks porphobilinogen and delta-aminolevulinic acid were excreted in the urine in excess. Photosensitivity is occasionally present and the only manifestations may be psychiatric. About half of cases are asymptomatic. This is an hepatic form of porphyria. |In the family of Haeger-Aronsen et al. (1968), 13 persons in 5 sibships of 2 generations showed latent coproporphyria, in addition to the symptomatic proband. |Cripps and Peters (1970) found that tranquilizers, including meprobamate and chlorpromazine, precipitated attacks. |McIntyre et al. (1971) noted that increased hepatic delta-aminolevulinic acid synthetase has been demonstrated in 3 forms of hereditary porphyria: AIP, VP, and coproporphyria. |In cultured skin fibroblasts, Elder et al. (1976) found that the activity of coproporphyrinogen oxidase was about half normal. Similar findings were reported for leukocytes (Brodie et al., 1977). In the homozygous patient reported by Grandchamp et al. (1977), activity of coproporphyrinogen oxidase was only 2% of control values. |Andrews et al. (1984) found 27 cases of coproporphyria in a kindred in which 135 members were screened for fecal porphyrins. Of the 135, 6 females and 1 male had probably suffered clinical attacks; the M:F ratio of cases revealed by screening was 13:14. The proband had her first attack at age 84 years; diazepam and nitrazepam were incriminated in her attack, and other drugs in the other patients. The late manifestation is indicated by the fact that this report was from a department of geriatric medicine. The earliest attack in an affected person was at age 14 years. |Barohn et al. (1994) described acute peripheral neuropathy with hereditary coproporphyria. This is a common feature of AIP but is rare with this form of porphyria. |Gross et al. (2002) reported the molecular, enzymatic, and clinical study of a family with hereditary coproporphyria in which the proband was a 30-year-old woman suffering from acute crises with abdominal, neurologic, and psychiatric complaints. The proband's father, 1 brother, and a sister were found to be new carriers. The patient was treated with intravenous interval therapy with heme arginate for 10 months, with good clinical and metabolic response. |In 3 sibs (2 boys, 1 girl) with intense jaundice and hemolytic anemia at birth, Nordmann et al. (1983) found a high level of coproporphyrin in the urine and feces. The pattern of fetal porphyrin excretion was atypical because the major porphyrin was harderoporphyrin (more than 60%; normal, less than 20%). Homozygosity was suggested by the fact that the level of lymphocyte coproporphyrinogen III oxidase was 10% of controls in the sibs and 50% of normal in both parents (who showed only mild abnormalities of porphyrin excretion). The mutant enzyme showed abnormal kinetics. |Doss et al. (1984) likewise reported a case of the harderoporphyria variant. The parents were related, and the enzyme level was 7% in the patient and 53% in the mother; thus, homozygosity was suggested. The proband had severe jaundice, hemolytic anemia, and hepatosplenomegaly at birth. At age 10 slight photosensitivity and mild, compensated hemolytic anemia prompted diagnostic search for porphyria. |Schmitt et al. (2005) reported a fifth patient with harderoporphyria. They demonstrated that harderoporphyric patients exhibit iron overload secondary to dyserythropoiesis. |Hasanoglu et al. (2011) reported a Turkish male infant, born of consanguineous parents, with harderoporphyria. He presented with neonatal jaundice, hemolytic anemia, and severe cutaneous photosensitivity. At age 1.5 months, he had an acute porphyric attack characterized by hepatosplenomegaly, elevated liver enzymes, red urine, metabolic acidosis, and severe Coombs-negative hemolytic anemia. The child died at age 5 months. Laboratory studies showed increased urinary porphyrins, increased aminolevulinic acid, and porphobilinogen; fecal porphyrins were not measured. |
229050::hereditary folate malabsorption is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SLC46A1 gene (611672) on chromosome 17q11.|Hereditary folate malabsorption is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by signs and symptoms of folate deficiency that appear within a few months after birth. Infants exhibit low blood and cerebrospinal fluid folate levels with megaloblastic anemia, diarrhea, immune deficiency, infections, and neurologic deficits. Treatment with folate supplementation results in resolution of the signs and symptoms. The disorder is caused by impaired intestinal folate absorption and impaired transport of folate into the central nervous system (summary by Qiu et al., 2006). |Luhby et al. (1965) observed affected sisters, and Lanzkowsky (1970) described a sporadic case in a 20-year-old. The patients had an isolated defect in intestinal absorption of folic acid and a defect in transport of folic acid across the blood-brain barrier. Recurrent megaloblastic anemia, mental retardation, convulsions, and movement disorder (ataxia in Luhby's cases, athetosis in Lanzkowsky's) were manifestations. Basal ganglion calcification was described in Lanzkowsky's cases. The seizures were said to be reduced by folic acid in Luhby's cases but aggravated by folic acid in Lanzkowsky's. Parenteral folic acid corrected the anemia. |Corbeel et al. (1985) reported a patient in whom oral folic acid cured the anemia, diarrhea, and susceptibility to infections, but failed to prevent convulsions and the development of mental retardation and cerebral calcifications. (Cases of dihydropteridine reductase deficiency (261630) in which treatment with folinic acid is not given also develop intracranial calcification (Woody et al., 1989).) Corbeel et al. (1985) were prompted to give methionine along with vitamin B12 and folic acid because of low plasma methionine; the convulsions were controlled. |In a male patient, Steinschneider et al. (1990) confirmed improvement in the peripheral neuropathy with intramuscular folinic acid therapy as had been reported by Su (1976). |Rosenblatt and Fenton (2001) stated that this disorder had been described in fewer than 20 patients, mostly females.|Jebnoun et al. (2001) reported a large family of 8 children (6 males and 2 females) affected by congenital folate malabsorption. The first 5 children (4 boys and 1 girl) died within the first few months of life with diarrhea, vomiting, drowsiness, pallor, and glossitis. The 3 surviving children (1 girl and 2 boys) developed the same symptoms within the first weeks of life. In the surviving girl, studied at 3 months of age, blood cell count showed severe pancytopenia with an aregenerative normocytic anemia, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. The peripheral blood smear revealed hypersegmented neutrophils. Bone marrow was hypercellular with an excess of megaloblastic erythroblasts. Folate deficiency was confirmed in serum, red cells, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Methylfolate was undetectable. Congenital malabsorption of folate was confirmed by a folic acid loading test that showed a peak serum folate of 8 microg/liter 2 hours after oral administration of 40 microg/liter folic acid and body saturation 2 days before the test with an injection of 5 mg folinic acid. Intramuscular administration of folinic acid achieved detectable CSF folate levels in a dose-dependent manner. With intermittent folinic acid administration the child had normal growth and hematologic parameters but developed epilepsy at age 4 years and had a low IQ. |Geller et al. (2002) reported 2 Puerto Rican sibs with hereditary folate malabsorption. The female proband presented at 6.5 months of age with recurrent diarrhea, gastroesophageal reflux, frequent upper respiratory infections, bilateral pneumonia, urinary tract infection, eosinophilia, anemia, anorexia, poor weight gain, and oral ulcers. She continued to have infections and diarrhea and required blood and platelet transfusions for anemia and thrombocytopenia. Folate deficiency was diagnosed at age 8 months, and she responded well to folate therapy. Her younger sister was diagnosed with the disorder at age 2 months and responded well to proper treatment. Family history revealed that a deceased sister had also experienced recurrent diarrhea, pulmonary disease, eosinophilia, and seizures; she died from sepsis at age 4 months. Qiu et al. (2006) noted that the sisters reported by Geller et al. (2002) developed normally and remained completely well on folate supplements at ages 9 and 6 years, respectively. |Zhao et al. (2007) reported a male infant of Spanish/Brazilian/Mexican origin with hereditary folate malabsorption. He presented at age 4 months with severe macrocytic anemia and thrombocytopenia. He subsequently developed Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia. He had low serum folate and immunoglobulins. Treatment with folate replacement led to clinical improvement. An older sister had developed pancytopenia at age 3 months and died due to cytomegalovirus pneumonia. Molecular analysis identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the SLC46A1 gene (611672.0004 and 611672.0005). |Sofer et al. (2007) reported an Arab Israeli infant, born of consanguineous parents, with folate malabsorption. He presented at age 15 months with generalized and focal seizures and a decline in mental status. Laboratory tests revealed low folate levels in blood and CSF, accompanied by pancytopenia. Bone marrow aspiration confirmed the presence of megaloblastic anemia. Treatment with high-dose intravenous folinic acid led to normalization of CSF folate levels. |Shin et al. (2011) reported an English boy with hereditary folate malabsorption. The child developed Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia associated with anemia and undetectable plasma folate at age 2 months. He later showed delayed motor development, hyperreflexia, jerky movements, tremor, and proximal muscle wasting. Brain MRI at 3 years 9 months showed a slight delay in myelination. He improved neurologically with treatment, but had mild difficulty in fine motor skills and reading but good math skills. He developed occipital seizures at age 5 years. Shin et al. (2011) also reported an 8-year-old Tunisian boy, born of consanguineous parents, with hereditary folate malabsorption. The patient developed macrocytic anemia with low serum folate at age 2.5 months. He was treated with leucovorin, which corrected the anemia and axial hypertonia. EEG and head CT scan were normal. Two affected sibs had died. |
182601::autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia-4 (SPG4) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the SPAST gene (604277) on chromosome 2p22.|The hereditary spastic paraplegias (SPG, HSP) are a group of clinically and genetically diverse inherited disorders characterized predominantly by progressive lower extremity spasticity and weakness. SPG is classified by mode of inheritance (autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and X-linked) and whether the primary symptoms occur in isolation ('uncomplicated') or with other neurologic abnormalities ('complicated').|Pure SPG4 is the most common form of autosomal dominant hereditary SPG, comprising up to 45% of cases (Svenson et al., 2001; Crippa et al., 2006). |For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia, see SPG3A (182600).|In 5 of 7 French families and in 1 large Dutch pedigree with a form of autosomal dominant familial spastic paraplegia, Hazan et al. (1994) found linkage to a locus, which they termed FSP2 (also known as SPG4), on chromosome 2p. This finding distinguished the disease from autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia-3 (182600), which had been mapped to chromosome 14. Age of onset in the 6 families showing linkage to 2p varied widely within families and the mean age at onset ranged from 20 to 39 years. Thus, age of onset may be a poor criterion for classifying autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia. Anticipation in the age of onset was observed in 2 of the kindreds. |Durr et al. (1996) reported 12 families with autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia linked to the SPG4 locus on chromosome 2. Age of onset ranged from infancy to 63 years. The clinical expression of the disorder within a family included asymptomatic patients who were unaware of their condition, mildly affected individuals who had spastic gait but were able to walk independently, and severely affected patients who were wheelchair bound. Durr et al. (1996) commented on the extensive intra- and interfamilial clinical variation. |Nielsen et al. (1998) evaluated 5 families with 2p-linked pure spastic paraplegia. In 2 families, nonprogressive 'congenital' spastic paraplegia was seen in some affected members, whereas adult-onset progressive spastic paraplegia was present in others. Low backache was reported as a late symptom by 47% of the 63 at-risk members in the 5 families. Brain and total spinal cord MRI disclosed no significant abnormalities. Nielsen et al. (1998) concluded that SPG4 is a phenotypically heterogeneous disorder, characterized by both interfamilial and intrafamilial variation. |Nance et al. (1998) found striking variation in clinical features in 4 families with spastic paraplegia with linkage to chromosome 2 markers. Only mild neurologic signs were observed in some subjects. The clinical features of 1 family had previously been described by Boustany et al. (1987). Onset was generally in the third to fifth decades with an average onset age of 35 years (range, 5 to 61 years). All clearly affected patients had scissoring gait, and in all who were examined at least 2 of the following were found: extensor plantar responses, increased knee and ankle reflexes, increased tone, muscle spasms, or leg cramps. Urinary urgency or other symptoms compatible with a neurogenic bladder, leg weakness, and decreased vibration sense were present in some but not all patients. |Byrne et al. (1997, 1998) presented a family with autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia and a specific form of cognitive impairment who showed linkage to the SPG4 locus on chromosome 2. The pattern of cognitive impairment in this family was characterized primarily by deficits in visual-spatial functions. Dysfunction manifested itself by difficulty in carrying out new tasks, forgetfulness, poor spatial perception, and impaired visual-motor coordination. By haplotype analysis the presence of the mutant gene was identified in an individual who, at the age of 57, had the same pattern of cognitive impairment but no spastic paraplegia. Furthermore, 6 individuals who presented with the disease haplotype had normal neurologic and neuropsychologic examinations. All 6 were below the maximal age of onset in the family, namely, 60 years. In this Irish family the cognitive impairment was considered to be a manifestation of the SPG4 gene mutation. |Reid et al. (1999) investigated 35 individuals from 4 families of Welsh origin, 22 of whom had 'pure' hereditary spastic paraplegia, for the presence of subclinical cognitive impairment. They found significant reductions in scores on the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) among affected individuals compared to controls. To assess whether the lower MMSE scores were restricted to subjects older than 50 years, scores for affected subjects 50 years of age or younger were compared to those of controls. A significant difference in score remained. One of the families was linked to the chromosome 2 locus, while 2 others showed linkage to none of the loci known at that time. There was no significant difference between the results of these 2 groups. |McMonagle et al. (2000) compared the phenotypic expressions of autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paresis in several families with a mutation in the SPG4 gene and several families without a mutation in SPG4. In the mutation-positive group, age of onset was later, disability score was greater, progression of disease was faster, wheelchair use was greater (40.9% vs 4.8% in the mutation-excluded group), there was greater abnormal vibration sensation in the lower limbs (68.2% vs 19%), and fewer individuals were asymptomatic (18.2% vs 42.9%). Dementia was more prevalent in the mutation-positive group. McMonagle et al. (2000) emphasized the finding of cognitive impairment as a feature of SPG4 mutations. |White et al. (2000) reported a patient with familial SPG4 who had clinical dementia. Postmortem neuropathologic examination showed neuronal loss and tau- (MAPT; 157140) immunoreactive neurofibrillary tangles in the hippocampus and tau-immunoreactive balloon cells in the limbic area and neocortex. Lewy bodies were present in the substantia nigra. White et al. (2000) suggested that these findings confirmed an association of dementia with SPG4. |McMonagle et al. (2004) used several measures of cognitive function to assess 11 patients from 3 families in whom SPG4 was confirmed by genetic analysis or linkage. SPG4 patients scored significantly lower on the Cambridge cognitive examination (CAMCOG) (mean score of 73.5 compared to 91.7 in controls). After approximately 3 years, the patients' mean score fell to 64.4, whereas the mean control score declined slightly to 90.8. Deficits in the SPG4 patients were noted in attention, language expression, memory, and abstraction. Behavior assessment found that SPG4 patients exhibited agitation, aggression, apathy, irritability, depression, and disinhibition. Accounting for age, McMonagle et al. (2004) concluded that subtle changes in cognitive function in patients with SPG4 may begin after age 40 years, with more severe decline after age 60. |Orlacchio et al. (2004) reported 32 patients from 9 families from southern Scotland with SPG4. Age at onset varied from 11 to 53 years. In addition to classic features of hereditary spastic paraplegia, 2 of the 32 patients had mental retardation and 2 other patients had a thin corpus callosum and cerebellar atrophy. All affected members had the same mutation in the SPG4 gene (604277.0014), and haplotype analysis suggested a founder effect. |Orlacchio et al. (2004) reported a large Italian family in which all 16 members who had SPG4 also had congenital arachnoid cysts at the cerebellopontine angle ranging in size from 21 to 31 mm. Six patients also had mental retardation. Genetic analysis confirmed a mutation in the SPG4 gene. |McDermott et al. (2006) reported a patient with SPG4 who developed walking difficulties in his late teens with deteriorating gait in his 20s; he was wheelchair-dependent at age 35. He later developed stiffness in the upper limbs, bladder dysfunction, dysarthria, and swallowing difficulties. In his 40s, he developed respiratory insufficiency and distal muscle wasting in the lower limbs. Molecular analysis identified a mutation in the SPG4 gene (S445R; 604277.0021). The findings of bulbar and respiratory involvement, as well as lower motor neuron degeneration, broadened the phenotype associated with mutations in the SPG4 gene. |Orlacchio et al. (2008) reported a large 4-generation Italian family with SPG4 confirmed by genetic analysis. The mean ages at onset were 17.5 and 18.8 years for symptoms of the lower and upper limbs, respectively. There was a general impression of genetic anticipation spanning the 4 generations. All affected individuals had spasticity of the lower limbs and pyramidal tract signs such as hyperreflexia, extensor plantar responses, or both, and pes cavus. All patients also had weak intrinsic hand muscles, with severe amyotrophy most relevant in the thenar eminence. Peroneal muscle wasting was reported in five patients, and many used a cane. Other associated features included impaired vibration sensation and cognitive dysfunctions. All patients except 1 had temporal lobe epilepsy with partial complex seizures associated with hippocampal sclerosis. |Murphy et al. (2009) reported a family in which 12 members had SPG4 due to a deletion of exon 17 in the SPG4 gene (Beetz et al., 2007). Cognitive assessment performed over a 7-year period found that all 4 patients who were older than 60 years developed mild to moderate cognitive decline. Two younger patients aged 48 and 40, respectively, had mild cognitive impairment. Genetic analysis of this family was unusual because 4 patients with the SPG4 deletion also carried a microdeletion in the NIPA1 gene (608145), which causes SPG6 (600363); only 2 of these 4 had cognitive impairment. Five patients with only the SPG4 deletion had cognitive impairment, including 2 who did not have clinical signs of SPG. Another family member with only the NIPA1 microdeletion lacked clinical signs of SPG or cognitive impairment at age 57. Murphy et al. (2009) concluded that SPG4 is associated with cognitive decline, and that the SPG6 microdeletion does not have a clinical phenotype in this family. Postmortem examination of the proband, who had both deletions as well as SPG and cognitive impairment, showed a markedly atrophic spinal cord with degeneration of the corticospinal tracts, and superficial spongiosis and widespread ubiquitin-positive inclusions in the neocortex and white matter. |
235800::histidinemia is caused by heterozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding histidine ammonia-lyase (HAL; 609457) on chromosome 12q23.|Histidinemia is a metabolic disorder characterized by increased levels of histidine in blood, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid, and decreased levels of the metabolite urocanic acid in blood, urine, and skin cells. Although histidinemia was originally associated with mental retardation and speech defects, it is generally considered to be a benign disorder (Levy et al., 2001). However, it is possible that histidinemia may be a risk factor for developmental disorders in certain individuals under specific circumstances, such as perinatal events (Ishikawa, 1987). |Ghadimi et al. (1961) reported 2 patients with histidinemia and suggested that it resulted from a 'familial disturbance of histidine metabolism.' Auerbach et al. (1962) were unable to detect the histidase metabolites urocanic acid or FIGLU (formiminoglutamic acid) in the urine of a patient with histidinemia, whereas loading with urocanic acid produced large amounts of FIGLU, indicating normal urocanase activity. Auerbach et al. (1962) concluded that the defect was in the histidase enzyme. La Du et al. (1962) found decreased histidase activity in cells from a patient with histidinemia, confirming the enzymatic defect. Levy et al. (1969) demonstrated that individuals with histidinemia had no detectable urocanic acid in the stratum corneum of skin. |The cases reported by Woody et al. (1965) had partial histidase deficiency, indicating clinical heterogeneity. Anakura et al. (1975) reported 2 brothers with different levels of histidase activity. |Bruckman et al. (1970) reported a family with affected members in 2 generations: a mother and 3 children were affected, whereas the father was biochemically normal. The findings were unusual in that they suggested autosomal dominant inheritance. |Rosenblatt et al. (1970) described histidinemia discovered in a 17-year-old French-Canadian girl after renal transplant for chronic glomerulonephritis. The histidase activity of the transplanted kidney was not adequate to correct the metabolic defect. |Levy et al. (1974) reported no clinical abnormalities in 20 prospectively studied histidinemic children identified by neonatal screening. Speech and mean IQ levels were normal. Alfi et al. (1978) reported a 5-year follow-up of 13 patients with histidinemia, 3 of whom were identified at ages 3.9, 5.3, and 6.2 years, respectively. None of the patients had a special diet, although protein intake was somewhat limited. All patients showed normal weight, head circumference, developmental quotient, IQ, and hearing. Four patients had low-normal height, and 1 had episodes of eczematoid rash unrelated to blood histidine levels. |Rosenmann et al. (1983) found descriptions of 43 probands and 26 sibs with histidinemia reported between 1961 and 1977. None of the probands was ascertained by neonatal screening. They found that less than 1% of individuals with histidinemia had CNS symptoms. |Coulombe et al. (1983) identified 21 histidinemic children from 16 families by prenatal screening. All had normal CNS development at a mean age of 9.5 years after no dietary treatment. Outlier values did not correlate with degree of histidinemia. The authors concluded that there was no higher prevalence of central nervous system disorders among patients with histidinemia. However, they noted that histidinemia could be a risk factor for harmful effects under specific circumstances, such as abnormal perinatal events. |Lam et al. (1996) provided long-term follow-up on 108 infants in whom histidinemia was diagnosed in a neonatal screening program between 1966 and 1990. The incidence was estimated at 1 in 11,083. Five additional affected children were detected following diagnosis in a sib. Of the 113 infants, 9 were lost to follow-up. Infants diagnosed before 1981 (n = 47) were placed on a low histidine diet for an average period of 21 months. Neither developmental quotients nor IQ levels correlated with plasma histidine at diagnosis or with the mean plasma histidine throughout life. Growth was normal in all patients. There was no apparent benefit from a low histidine diet in early childhood. On the basis of these findings, Lam et al. (1996) concluded that histidinemia is a benign metabolic disorder that does not require treatment. |
236200::homocystinuria with or without response to pyridoxine is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding cystathionine beta-synthase (CBS; 613381) on chromosome 21q22.|Classic homocystinuria is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder of sulfur metabolism. The clinical features of untreated homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency usually manifest in the first or second decade of life and include myopia, ectopia lentis, mental retardation, skeletal anomalies resembling Marfan syndrome (MFS; 154700), and thromboembolic events. Light skin and hair can also be present. Biochemical features include increased urinary homocystine and methionine. There are 2 main phenotypes of the classic disorder: a milder pyridoxine (vitamin B6)-responsive form, and a more severe pyridoxine-nonresponsive form. Pyridoxine is a cofactor for the CBS enzyme, and can aid in the conversion of homocysteine to cysteine (summary by Reish et al., 1995 and Testai and Gorelick, 2010). |Some patients have been reported to have a milder form of homocystinuria, which is characterized by increased plasma homocysteine and increased risk for thrombotic events in young adulthood, but without the other skeletal, ocular, or nervous system manifestations observed in classic homocystinuria (Kelly et al., 2003). |Homocystinuria was discovered independently by Gerritsen et al. (1962) in Madison, Wisconsin, and by Carson and Neill (1962) in Belfast, Northern Ireland. The patients of both groups were studied because of mental retardation. |Mudd et al. (1985) compiled data on 629 patients with homocystinuria collected from all parts of the world. Among patients not discovered by newborn screening, mental capabilities were higher in B6-responsive patients (mean IQ, 79) than in B6-nonresponsive patients (mean IQ, 57). Time-to-event curves for other major clinical abnormalities were also presented. For untreated B6-responsive and B6-nonresponsive patients, these were, respectively: chance of dislocation of lenses by age 10, 55% and 82%; chance of having clinically detected thromboembolic event by age 15, 12% and 27%; chance of radiologic detection of spinal osteoporosis by age 15, 36% and 64%,, and chance of not surviving to age 30, 4% and 23%. When initiated neonatally, methionine restriction prevented mental retardation, reduced the rate of lens dislocation, and may have reduced the incidence of seizures. Pyridoxine treatment of late-detected B6-responsive patients reduced the rate of occurrence of initial thromboembolic events. Following 586 surgical procedures, 25 postoperative thromboembolic complications occurred, of which 6 were fatal. Few abnormalities were found in the offspring of either male or female patients, and the evidence was inconclusive concerning the rate of fetal loss from mothers with untreated homocystinuria. Among patients detected neonatally, only 13% were B6-responsive as compared with 47% among late-detected B6-responders. |Abbott et al. (1987) evaluated 63 patients with homocystinuria for psychiatric disturbance, intelligence, evidence of other CNS problems, and responsiveness to vitamin B6. Clinically significant psychiatric disorders were found in 51%. The average IQ was 80; IQ was lower among vitamin B6-nonresponsive patients. |Hypopigmentation is a feature of homocystinuria and can be shown to be reversible in patients with pyridoxine-responsive homocystinuria. Instances have been observed in which darkening of newly growing hair is observed after initiation of pyridoxine therapy, creating a clear demarcation between the old, blond and the new, dark hair (Reish et al., 1995). The consistency of the hair also changed from a coarse to a softer texture. |Yap et al. (2001) studied mental capabilities of 23 pyridoxine-nonresponsive individuals with CBS deficiency with over 339 patient-years of treatment and compared these individuals to those of 10 unaffected sibs (controls). Of the 23 individuals, 19 were diagnosed through newborn screening with early treatment, 2 were late-detected, and 2 were untreated at the time of assessment. Thirteen of the newborn-screened group who were compliant with treatment had no complications, while the remaining 6, who were poorly compliant, developed complications. Good compliance was defined by a lifetime plasma free homocysteine median of less than 11 micromole per liter. The newborn-screened good-compliance group with a mean age of 14.4 years (range 4.4-24.9) had a full-scale IQ of 105.8 (range 84-120), while the poorly compliant group with a mean age of 19.9 years (range 13.8 to 25.5) had a mean full-scale IQ of 80.8 (range 40-103). The control group had a mean age of 19.4 years and a mean IQ of 102. The 2 late-detected patients had IQs of 80 and 102 at the age of almost 19 years, while the 2 untreated patients had IQs in the mid-fifties at the age of 22 and 11 years. |In a review, Testai and Gorelick (2010) noted that thromboembolic events are the most common cause of death in patients with classic homocystinuria and can manifest as peripheral vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, stroke, peripheral artery occlusion, and myocardial infarction. The risk of having a vascular event is 25% before age 16 years and 50% by age 30 years. |Clinical Variability: Thrombotic Hyperhomocysteinemia, CBS-Related|Gaustadnes et al. (2000) found that 3 of 5 unrelated patients with severe hyperhomocysteinemia and thrombosis, but no other features of classic homocystinuria, were compound heterozygous for mutations in the CBS gene, consistent with CBS deficiency. |Maclean et al. (2002) reported 2 unrelated Danish patients who presented with transient ischemic attacks at age 36 and 22 years, respectively. Biochemical studies showed increased serum homocysteine, but neither had other features of classic homocystinuria such as mental retardation, ectopia lentis, or skeletal changes. Each patient was compound heterozygous for 2 mutations in the CBS gene: one with D444N (613381.0010) and P422L (613381.0013), and the other with I278T (613381.0004) and S466L (613381.0014). In vitro functional expression studies showed that the P422L and S466L mutant proteins were catalytically active and even had higher activity than wildtype, but were impaired in regulation by AdoMet. The findings illustrated the importance of AdoMet for the regulation of homocysteine metabolism. |Kelly et al. (2003) reported 3 unrelated patients with premature stroke and severe hyperhomocysteinemia. Excluding tall stature in 2 patients, none had clinical features of classic homocystinuria. All had increased serum methionine and increased urinary homocystine. Molecular analysis found that each patient was heterozygous for a different CBS mutation (I278T, 613381.0004; D444N, 613381.0010, and G307S, 613381.0001); however, the possibility for another unidentified CBS mutation could not be ruled out. The report expanded the phenotypic variability associated with CBS mutations to include premature stroke and hyperhomocysteinemia without the classic findings of CBS deficiency. The findings also suggested that increased serum homocysteine can be associated with early-onset stroke (see 603174). |
236250::homocystinuria due to methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the MTHFR gene (607093) on chromosome 1p36.|Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency is a common inborn error of folate metabolism. The phenotypic spectrum ranges from severe neurologic deterioration and early death to asymptomatic adults. In the classic form, both thermostable and thermolabile enzyme variants have been identified (Rosenblatt et al., 1992). |Freeman et al. (1972) studied a 15-year-old mildly retarded black female with a 2-year history of progressive withdrawal, hallucinations, delusions, and catatonia unresponsive to psychotherapy. Homocystinuria without elevation of plasma methionine was found. Psychotic symptoms gradually disappeared with administration of pyridoxine and folic acid. A sister had the same chemical findings but no symptoms. Cystathionine synthetase and the enzymes methylating homocysteine were normal in liver and fibroblasts. A decrease was shown in methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase, the enzyme synthesizing N(5)-methyltetrahydrofolate. Preliminary results of enzymatic studies in Freeman's case were reported by Mudd et al. (1972). |Shih et al. (1972) described the case of a 16-year-old boy with proximal muscle weakness, waddling gait, and episodes of flinging movements of the upper limbs. Folic acid reduced the homocystinuria. Flavin adenine dinucleotide, which had no effect in Freeman's cases, reduced the homocystinuria. Thus, the patient studied by Shih et al. (1972) may have had an allelic disorder.|Narisawa et al. (1977) described 2 cases of homocysteinuria that differed from the 4 earlier reported ones in that progression to death occurred in 1 year. Clinical features included fits of apnea, seizures, and coma. They suggested that this is an infantile form of the disorder. |In a sibship of 6, Visy et al. (1991) found 3 sibs with homocysteinemia and homocystinuria due to MTHFR deficiency. All 3 came to medical attention because of severe recurrent thrombotic strokes in adulthood, at ages 23, 24, and 20 years. All 3 had mild mental retardation with IQs in the 80s. Two of the sibs died within a year of clinical onset. |Haworth et al. (1993) reported the cases of 2 brothers with MTHFR deficiency. One brother remained asymptomatic at age 37 years. The younger brother developed limb weakness, incoordination, paresthesiae, and memory lapses at age 15 years; by his early twenties, he was wheelchair-bound. Both had homocystinuria, homocysteinemia, and low plasma levels of methionine. In cultured skin fibroblasts of both patients, MTHFR activities were less than 10% of control values, and residual enzyme activities were markedly reduced on heating. The parents had intermediate enzyme activities, and the reductase in the father (who had unexplained paraparesis and homocysteinemia), but not in the mother, was also thermolabile. With oral folate and betaine therapy, the biochemical abnormality was improved but not totally corrected. |Cappuccio et al. (2014) reported 2 sibs and a first cousin with MTHFR deficiency presenting as early infantile epileptic encephalopathy. All showed poor sucking, hypotonia, microcephaly, and lethargy in the newborn period. The most severely affected patient had onset of intractable seizures at age 1 month and died at age 7 months. Brain MRI showed cerebral atrophy with abnormal sulcation and gyral patterns in the frontobasal areas. The 2 other children developed intractable seizures associated with hypsarrhythmia at 10 and 18 months of age, respectively. The seizures were at first difficult to control, but both patients eventually became seizure-free with topiramate. Both had developmental delay of varying degrees. The patient with onset of seizures at age 18 months could walk independently at age 5 years but was unable to speak, whereas the other child showed severe psychomotor retardation and was unable to sit or stand at age 2. Brain imaging of both patients showed diffuse white matter hyperintensities, hypoplasia of the cerebellum and brainstem, and thinning of the corpus callosum. Laboratory studies showed increased plasma homocysteine and decreased methionine, consistent with MTHFR deficiency, and genetic analysis identified compound heterozygous mutations in the MTHFR gene. Treatment with folinic acid and betaine resulted in only a slight improvement in muscle tone. Cappuccio et al. (2014) noted the phenotypic variability in these patients with the same genotype, and suggested that the neurotoxicity in MTHFR deficiency may be augmented by homocysteine-derived metabolites, although it may also be multifactorial. |Kang et al. (1991) found a form of MTHFR deficiency that is characterized by the absence of neurologic abnormalities, an enzyme activity of about 50% of normal, and distinctive thermolability of the MTHFR enzyme under specific conditions of heat inactivation. Studies in 10 families were consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance of the thermolabile trait. A plot of percent residual activity after heat inactivation against a specific enzyme activity as determined in lymphocytes separated affected individuals from unaffected. Frosst et al. (1995) identified a C-to-T substitution at nucleotide 677 (607093.0003) of the MTHFR gene that converts an alanine to a valine residue and is responsible for the synthesis of a thermolabile form of MTHFR. |Kang et al. (1991) concluded that thermolabile MTHFR is positively associated with the development of coronary artery disease. In 17% of cardiac patients and only 5% of controls, thermolabile MTHFR was found. The average age of onset of clinical coronary artery disease in patients with thermolabile MTHFR was 57.3 years; the mean total plasma homocysteine concentration in patients with thermolabile MTHFR was 13.19, a significantly different value from the normal mean of 8.50 nmol/ml. Engbersen et al. (1995) studied thermolability of MTHFR in control subjects and in vascular patients with mild hyperhomocysteinemia or normohomocysteinemia. They concluded that abnormal homocysteine metabolism could be attributed to thermolabile MTHFR in 28% of hyperhomocysteinemic patients with premature vascular disease. |Adams et al. (1996) studied 532 subjects (310 myocardial infarction patients and 222 population-based controls) and found no difference in either MTHFR genotype distribution (p = 0.57) or allele frequencies (p = 0.68) between cases and controls. They concluded that the thermolabile variant of MTHFR is not a major risk factor for myocardial infarction and is unlikely to explain a significant proportion of the reported association of hyperhomocysteinemia with coronary artery disease. |Among 16 obligate heterozygotes with thermolabile MTHFR deficiency, Kang et al. (1991) found 4 subjects who had less than 25% of normal mean MTHFR specific activity in lymphocyte extracts. The biochemical features in these 4 subjects were distinguishable from homozygotes for the thermolabile MTHFR, whose specific activity was approximately 50% of the normal mean, and from heterozygotes for severe MTHFR deficiency, in whom the enzyme is thermostable and has a specific activity of about 50% of the normal mean. Kang et al. (1991) proposed that these 4 subjects represent genetic compounds of the allele for the severe mutation and the allele for the thermolabile mutation of the MTHFR gene. Subjects with this genetic compound constitution appear to be more susceptible to the development of intermediate hyperhomocysteinemia despite normal folate and B12 levels. Nonetheless, hyperhomocysteinemia due to this compound heterozygosity is correctable by oral folic acid therapy. |
250940::homocystinuria-megaloblastic anemia, cblG complementation type, is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the MTR gene (156570) on chromosome 1q43.|Homocystinuria and megaloblastic anemia is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism resulting from defects in the cobalamin (vitamin B12)-dependent pathway that converts homocysteine to methionine, which is catalyzed by methionine synthase. Clinical features are somewhat variable, but include delayed psychomotor development, megaloblastic anemia, homocystinuria, and hypomethioninemia, all of which respond to cobalamin supplementation. Methylmalonic aciduria is not present. Two complementation groups have been described based on fibroblast studies: CblE (236270) and CblG (Watkins and Rosenblatt, 1988). Most patients present in early infancy, but some patients with CblG have shown later onset (Outteryck et al., 2012). Cells from patients with CblE fail to incorporate methyltetrahydrofolate into methionine in whole cells, but cell extracts show normal methionine synthase activity in the presence of a reducing agent. Cells from patients with CblG have defects in the methionine synthase enzyme under both conditions (summary by Leclerc et al., 1996). |CblE is caused by mutation in the MTRR gene (602568).|Watkins and Rosenblatt (1989) commented on the clinical and biochemical heterogeneity in patients with cblE and cblG. |Thomas et al. (1985) and Rosenblatt et al. (1987) reported a boy with methylcobalamin deficiency who presented at age 6 weeks with lethargy, staring spells and vomiting after varicella infection. He was hypotonic and unresponsive to stimuli and required intubation and ventilation. Findings included homocystinuria, hypomethioninemia, megaloblastic anemia, and normal serum folate and B12 levels. No methylmalonic aciduria was detected. Skin fibroblasts could not grow when methionine was replaced by homocysteine in the medium. Clinical response to vitamin B12 (hydroxocobalamin) was dramatic, with disappearance of homocystine and rise in blood methionine. Although the patient was originally thought to have CblE, methionine synthetase activity was decreased in patient fibroblasts when the assay was performed under both optimal and suboptimal reducing conditions, consistent with CblG. |Gulati et al. (1996) analyzed cell lines derived from 2 cblG patients: 1 patient had onset in the first 4 months of life of severe neurologic dysfunction and homocystinuria, but no megaloblastic anemia, whereas the other patient had mental retardation, macrocytic anemia, and homocystinuria. |Leclerc et al. (1996) studied cell lines from 2 Caucasian boys with methylcobalamin deficiency. One presented at age 3 months with failure to thrive, severe eczema, megaloblastic anemia, methylmalonic aciduria, homocystinuria, and methylmalonic aciduria; the other presented at age 4 years with developmental delay, tremors, gait instability, megaloblastic anemia, and homocystinuria. |Kvittingen et al. (1997) reported a child with methionine synthase deficiency who presented with neonatal homocystinuria, hypomethioninemia, and severe neurologic symptoms, including developmental delay and seizures. Over an 8-year period both off and on treatment, the patient did not develop megaloblastic anemia. The activity of methionine synthase in fibroblasts was severely deficient, and formation of methylcobalamin from labeled cyanocobalamin was very low. Complementation studies indicated a cblG defect. In addition, the patient was homozygous for the 677C-T mutation in the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) gene (607093.0003). Kvittingen et al. (1997) hypothesized that the MTHFR polymorphism protected the patient against anemia, and speculated that homozygosity for the MTHFR 677C-T mutation may cause the dissociation between hematologic and neurologic disease seen in some patients with vitamin B12 deficiency. |Wilson et al. (1998) reported a brother and sister what they termed the 'cblG variant form' of methionine synthase deficiency, defined as no detectable methionine synthase activity and lack of binding of the cobalamin cofactor to the enzyme. The boy developed generalized seizures at 3 days of age, became progressively hypotonic, and developed respiratory failure at 10 weeks of age. An initial diagnosis of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) deficiency (236250) was made on the basis of elevated plasma and urine homocysteine but low plasma methionine without macrocytic anemia. With treatment based on that diagnosis, he was well enough to be weaned from the respirator by 14 weeks of age. At 2 years of age, he had severe psychomotor retardation and microcephaly. A definitive diagnosis of methionine synthase deficiency was made by means of complementation analysis of cultured fibroblasts, which placed him in the cblG complementation group. He was subsequently treated with vitamin B12, betaine, and aspirin, and, at age 8 years, methionine was added. He required femoral osteotomies and bilateral adductor- and heel-cord release for neuromuscular hip dislocations and contractures. At age 10 years, he had short stature, microcephaly, rotary nystagmus, thin fingers, and spasticity. He smiled but was not able to sit or speak. The younger sister was found to have elevated plasma homocysteine and low methionine at 6 days of age. She also was presumed to have MTHFR deficiency and was started on therapy for that, but medications were discontinued by her mother after a few days because the child appeared to be doing well. At 3 months of age, she had seizures and respiratory distress, and medication was restarted. By 18 months of age, she was microcephalic and severely developmentally delayed. The diagnosis of cblG was established at 2 years of age, and she was treated in the same manner as her brother. At 9 years, she had short stature, microcephaly, rotary nystagmus, and pes planus. She was able to walk, responded to simple commands, and could speak a few words. Wilson et al. (1998) reported another boy with the so-called cblG variant. He presented with short stature, failure to thrive, progressive weakness, hypotonia, ocular nystagmus, jaundice, feeding difficulties, and diarrhea at 7 to 10 weeks of age (Wildin and Scott, 1992). He had severe megaloblastic anemia and neutropenia, homocysteinemia, hypomethioninemia, and formiminoglutamic aciduria without methylmalonic aciduria, which led to the diagnosis of a defect in methionine synthesis. Treatment resulted in improved metabolite levels, improvement of tone, and reduction of nystagmus, but poor growth, developmental delay, feeding difficulties requiring a gastrostomy, persistent anemia, and immunologic deficits were present at age 4 years. All 3 of these patients were found to have biallelic null mutations in the MTR gene (156570.0004-156570.0007), resulting in absence of the protein. |Labrune et al. (1999) described a girl, born of first-cousin parents, who presented at the age of 18 months with megaloblastic anemia. One month later, she developed pulmonary hypertension and renal failure, leading after renal biopsy to the diagnosis of hemolytic uremic syndrome. Investigations showed reduced methionine synthase activity under standard reducing conditions, compatible with cblG complementation group. At age 13 years, this girl required hemodialysis after acute rejection of a renal transplant. |Carmel et al. (1988) described the cblG mutation in a 21-year-old white woman who had been misdiagnosed as having multiple sclerosis. Her manifestations closely resembled subacute combined degeneration. Mild macrocytic anemia was present. Throughout childhood she had been awkward and had poor coordination. Urinary homocystine excretion was elevated, plasma methionine was decreased, and urinary cystathionine excretion was normal. No methylmalonic acid was detected in the urine. This constellation of findings suggested either the cblE or cblG mutation. Complementation analysis showed complementation with fibroblasts from 2 patients with the cblE mutation, but not with cells from 2 patients with the cblG mutation, indicating that the patient's defect corresponded to the latter mutation. Methionine synthase activity in fibroblast extracts was subnormal. |Outteryck et al. (2012) reported a young woman who presented at age 23 years with pain in the lower limbs. She had macrocytosis without anemia. Over the following 6 years, she developed progressive paraparesis and cognitive dysfunction. Brain and spinal cord MRI showed moderate cerebral atrophy with periventricular leukoencephalopathy and mild thinning of the cervical spinal cord; she also had optic neuropathy. Biochemical studies showed hyperhomocysteinemia, homocystinuria, hypomethioninemia, and absence of methylmalonic aciduria. Studies of cultured fibroblasts showed a defect in homocysteine remethylation, and complementation studies confirmed a cblG defect. Treatment with hydroxycobalamin and oral betaine resulted in rapid biochemical and slower clinical improvement. Outteryck et al. (2012) noted the unusual presentation of the disorder in this patient. |
143100::Huntington disease (HD) is caused by a heterozygous expanded trinucleotide repeat (CAG)n, encoding glutamine, in the gene encoding huntingtin (HTT; 613004) on chromosome 4p16.|In normal individuals, the range of repeat numbers is 9 to 36. In those with HD, the repeat number is above 37 (Duyao et al., 1993).|Huntington disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant progressive neurodegenerative disorder with a distinct phenotype characterized by chorea, dystonia, incoordination, cognitive decline, and behavioral difficulties. There is progressive, selective neural cell loss and atrophy in the caudate and putamen. Walker (2007) provided a detailed review of Huntington disease, including clinical features, population genetics, molecular biology, and animal models. |The classic signs of Huntington disease are progressive chorea, rigidity, and dementia. A characteristic atrophy of the caudate nucleus is seen radiographically. Typically, there is a prodromal phase of mild psychotic and behavioral symptoms which precedes frank chorea by up to 10 years. Chandler et al. (1960) observed that the age of onset was between 30 and 40 years. In a study of 196 kindreds, Reed and Neel (1959) found only 8 in which both parents of a single patient with Huntington chorea were 60 years of age or older and normal. The clinical features developed progressively with severe increase in choreic movements and dementia. The disease terminated in death on average 17 years after manifestation of the first symptoms. |Folstein et al. (1984, 1985) contrasted HD in 2 very large Maryland pedigrees: an African American family residing in a bayshore tobacco farming community and a white Lutheran family living in a farming community in the western Maryland foothills and descended from an immigrant from Germany. They differed, respectively, in age at onset (33 years vs 50 years), presence of manic-depressive symptoms (2 vs 75), number of cases of juvenile onset (6 vs 0), mode of onset (abnormal gait vs psychiatric symptoms), and frequency of rigidity or akinesia (5/21 vs 1/15). In the African American family, the mean age at onset was 25 years when the father was affected and 41 years when the mother was affected; the corresponding figures in the white family were 49 and 52 years. Allelic mutations were postulated. In another survey in Maryland, Folstein et al. (1987) found that the prevalence of HD among African Americans was equal to that in whites. |Adams et al. (1988) found that life-table estimates of age of onset of motor symptoms have produced a median age 5 years older than the observed mean when correction for truncated intervals of observation (censoring) was made. The bias of censoring refers to the variable intervals of observation and loss to observation at different ages. For example, gene carriers lost to follow-up, those deceased before onset of disease, and those who had not yet manifested the disease at the time of data collection were excluded from the observed distribution of age at onset. |Kerbeshian et al. (1991) described a patient with childhood-onset Tourette syndrome (137580) who later developed Huntington disease. |Shiwach (1994) performed a retrospective study of 110 patients with Huntington disease in 30 families. He found the minimal lifetime prevalence of depression to be 39%. The frequency of symptomatic schizophrenia was 9%, and significant personality change was found in 72% of the sample. The age at onset was highly variable: some showed signs in the first decade and some not until over 60 years of age. |The results of a study by Shiwach and Norbury (1994) clashed with the conventional wisdom that psychiatric symptoms are a frequent presentation of Huntington disease before the development of neurologic symptoms. They performed a control study of 93 neurologically healthy individuals at risk for Huntington disease. The 20 asymptomatic heterozygotes showed no increased incidence of psychiatric disease of any sort when compared to the 33 normal homozygotes in the same group. However, the whole group of heterozygous and homozygous normal at-risk individuals showed a significantly greater number of psychiatric episodes than did their 43 spouses, suggesting stress from the uncertainty associated with belonging to a family segregating this disorder. Shiwach and Norbury (1994) concluded that neither depression nor psychiatric disorders are likely to be significant preneurologic indicators of heterozygous expression of the disease gene. |Giordani et al. (1995) performed extensive neuropsychologic evaluations on 8 genotype-positive individuals comparing them to 8 genotype-negative individuals from families with Huntington disease. They found no significant differences between these 2 groups, casting further doubt on earlier reports that suggested cognitive impairments are premonitory signs of the classical neurologic syndrome of Huntington disease. |Rosenberg et al. (1995) performed a double-blind study on 33 persons at risk for HD who had applied for genetic testing. Significantly inferior cognitive functioning was disclosed in gene carriers by a battery of neuropsychologic tests covering attentional, visuospatial, learning, memory, and planning functions. Primarily, attentional, learning, and planning functions were affected. |Bamford et al. (1995) performed a prospective analysis of neuropsychologic performance and CT scans of 60 individuals with Huntington disease. They found that psychomotor skills showed the most significant consistent decline among cognitive functions assessed. |Lovestone et al. (1996) described an unusual HD family in which all 4 affected members presented first with a severe psychiatric syndrome which in 3 cases was schizophreniform in nature. Two other living members with no apparent signs of motor disorder had received psychiatric treatment, 1 for schizophrenia. |Mochizuki et al. (1999) described a case of late-onset Huntington disease with the first symptom of dysphagia. The 61-year-old man was admitted with dysphagia and dysarthria, which had developed gradually over 2 years. The patient had no psychologic signs, dementia, paresis, involuntary movements, ataxia, or sensory disturbance in the limbs. Dysphagia and dysarthria appeared to be caused by a 'cough-like movement' just before or during speaking or swallowing. Because the 'cough-like movement' progressed for 3 years and was eventually suppressed with disappearance of dysphagia after administration of haloperidol, this symptom was thought to be due to HD. |Paulsen et al. (2006) studied the brain structure of 24 preclinical HD patients as measured by brain MRI and compared them to 24 healthy control subjects matched by age and gender. Preclinical HD individuals had substantial morphologic differences throughout the cerebrum compared to controls. The volume of cerebral cortex was significantly increased in preclinical HD, whereas basal ganglion and cerebral white matter volumes were substantially decreased. Although decreased volumes of the striatum and cerebral white matter could represent early degenerative changes, the finding of an enlarged cortex suggested that developmental pathology occurs in HD. |Marshall et al. (2007) compared psychiatric manifestations among 29 HD mutation carriers with no clinical symptoms, 20 HD mutation carriers with mild motor symptoms, 34 manifesting HD patients, and 171 nonmutation controls. The mild motor symptoms group and the manifesting HD group showed significantly higher scores for obsessive-compulsive behavior, interpersonal sensitivity, anxiety, paranoia, and psychoticism compared to the nonmutation control group. The mutation carriers without symptoms had higher scores for anxiety, paranoid ideation, and psychoticism compared to the nonmutation control group. The results indicated that individuals in the preclinical stage of HD exhibit specific psychiatric symptoms and that additional symptoms may manifest later in the disease course. Walker (2007) noted that suicidal ideation is a frequent finding in Huntington disease and that physicians should be aware of increased suicide risk both in asymptomatic at-risk patients and symptomatic patients. |Behan and Bone (1977) reported hereditary chorea without dementia. The oldest affected person in their family was aged 61 years. |Juvenile-onset Huntington disease, typically defined as onset before age 20 years, is estimated to comprise less than 10% of all HD cases. It is usually transmitted from an affected father, is associated with very large CAG repeat sizes (60 or more) in the HTT gene, and typically shows rigidity and seizures (Nance and Myers, 2001; Ribai et al., 2007). |The juvenile form of Huntington disease was first described by Hoffmann (1888) using data from a 3-generation family. He identified 2 daughters with onset at 4 and 10 years who showed rigidity, hypokinesia, and seizures.|Barbeau (1970) pointed out that patients with the juvenile form of Huntington chorea seem more often to have inherited their disorder from the father than from the mother. Ridley et al. (1988) showed that Huntington disease shows anticipation, but only on paternal inheritance, with the consequence that patients with juvenile Huntington disease inherit the disease from their fathers. |Navarrete et al. (1994) described a family in which a brother and sister had very early onset of Huntington disease. Clinical manifestations were apparent in both sibs at the age of 8 years; the brother died at age 10. The father of these sibs was affected from the age of 29 years. |Milunsky et al. (2003) described 1 of the youngest children ever reported with juvenile HD. The girl, 5 years old at the time of report, had been adopted because of the inability of her biologic parents to care for her. Her biologic father was subsequently found to have HD. The girl demonstrated near-normal development until about 18 months of age. Brain MRI had been normal at 2 years of age; at 3.5 years of age, there was marked cerebellar atrophy involving the vermis and cerebellar hemispheres, diminutive middle cerebellar peduncles, and an enlarged fourth ventricle. By age 3 years and 10 months, the patient required gastric tube feeding. Choreiform movements, predominantly on the right side, developed at approximately 4 years of age. Milunsky et al. (2003) developed a modified PCR method using XL (extra long)-PCR that allowed them to diagnose 265 triplet repeats on one HTT allele and 14 on the other. |Nahhas et al. (2005) reported a girl with a maternal family history of HD who had onset of symptoms at age 3 and died at age 7 due to complications of HD. The patient's mother had symptoms of HD at age 18. Molecular analysis revealed that the mother had 70 CAG repeats whereas the daughter had approximately 130 CAG repeats. Nahhas et al. (2005) stated that this was the largest reported molecularly confirmed CAG expansion from a maternal transmission, demonstrating that very large expansions can also occur through the maternal lineage. |Yoon et al. (2006) reported 3 patients with onset of HD before age 10 years. All had speech delay in early childhood as the first symptom, which predated motor symptoms by at least 2 years. All children later developed severe dysarthria. Initial gross motor symptoms included ataxic gait and falls; initial behavioral problems included aggression, irritability, and hyperactivity. CAG repeats were 120, 100, and 93, respectively, and all children inherited the disorder from their fathers. |Ribai et al. (2007) performed a retrospective analysis of 29 French patients with juvenile-onset HD. The mean delay before diagnosis was 9 years. The most common signs at onset were severe cognitive and psychiatric disturbances (65.5% of patients), including severe alcohol or drug addiction and psychotic disorder. In these patients, motor signs occurred a mean of 6 years after cognitive or psychiatric signs. Three other patients presented with myoclonic head tremor, 3 with chorea, and 1 with progressive cerebellar signs. Thirteen (46%) had fewer than 60 CAG repeats (range, 45 to 58). Six patients inherited the disease from their fathers, and 7 from their mothers, with similar anticipation. However, all cases with onset before age 10 years were paternally inherited. |Sakazume et al. (2009) reported a girl with onset of HD beginning at age 2 years with motor regression, speech difficulties due to oromotor dysfunction, and frequent temper tantrums. Onset of severe prolonged generalized seizures began at age 4 years. Brain MRI showed severe cerebellar atrophy in the vermis and cortex, in addition to atrophy in the caudate, putamen, and globus pallidus. Her mother, grandparent, and great-grandparent were affected. Molecular analysis showed that the child had 160 CAG repeats, whereas her mother had 60 repeats. A review of 7 reported patients with early-onset HD showed that 4 had inherited the expanded allele from the mother, and that the mothers were relatively young at the time of pregnancy, ranging from 20 to 27 years. These findings suggested that the incidence of maternal transmission in early-onset HD may be higher than that in adult-onset HD. Three of the 7 previously reported patients with early-onset HD had cerebellar atrophy. |
236600::congenital hydrocephalus-1 (HYC1) is caused by homozygous mutation in the CCDC88C gene (611204) on chromosome 14.|Congenital hydrocephalus-1 is characterized by onset in utero of enlarged ventricles due to a disturbance of cerebrospinal fluid accumulation. Affected individuals may have neurologic impairment (summary by Drielsma et al., 2012). |Hydrocephalus can also be caused by Arnold-Chiari malformation, atresia of foramen of Magendie, stenosis of aqueduct of Sylvius (307000), toxoplasmosis, hydranencephaly, etc. Furthermore, it develops in infancy or childhood in achondroplasia (100800) and in Hurler disease (607014).|Genetic Heterogeneity of Congenital Hydrocephalus|See also HYC2 (615219), caused by mutation in the MPDZ gene (603785) on chromosome 9p23, and HYC3 (617967), caused by mutation in the WDR81 gene (614218) on chromosome 17p13.|An X-linked form of congenital hydrocephalus (HSAS, HYCX; 307000) is caused by mutation in the L1CAM gene on (308840) on chromosome Xq28.|Ekici et al. (2010) reported a girl, born of consanguineous parents of Algerian origin, with congenital nonsyndromic hydrocephalus. Fetal ultrasound at 25 weeks' gestation showed enlarged ventricles. Brain MRI at age 3 days showed dilatation of the lateral ventricles with normal third and fourth ventricles. A diverticulum-like pouch extended from the medial-posterior aspect of the left lateral ventricle into the interhemispheric space, extending through the tentorium into the infratentorial space, leading to mild compression of the upper cerebellar vermis. The posterior fossa was markedly enlarged with supra- and retrocerebellar fluid accumulation. Communication between the fourth ventricle and the cisterna magna was normal. The child had seizures, but showed no other malformations, dysmorphism, or neurologic anomalies. At age 3 years, she showed normal psychomotor development. An earlier pregnancy of these parents had been terminated due to ventricular enlargement detected on prenatal ultrasound. |Drielsma et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated consanguineous families with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hydrocephalus. In 1 Ashkenazi Jewish family, 4 sibs had congenital hydrocephalus and seizures. The head circumferences at birth ranged from 39.5 to 49 cm, and all were delivered by cesarean section. Two had midline cystic structures and 1 had an extra-axial parietal cyst, but none had an enlarged fourth ventricle. One child had biparietal polymicrogyria. All were developmentally delayed, with moderate to severe mental retardation and motor impairment; one 18-year-old was severely affected and only able to sit. In the second family, a first-cousin couple of Palestinian origin underwent 5 terminations of pregnancy following the diagnosis of marked ventricular dilatation at mid-gestation. The couple also had a twin miscarriage at 10 weeks' gestation. |
236900::Benson et al. (1969) described hydroxylysinuria in a 19-year-old man and his 16-year-old sister, both of whom had myoclonic and major motor seizures and were mentally retarded. The parents were related. The clinical features were similar in a patient reported by Parker et al. (1970). |
237000::Hydroxyproline is an imino acid normally present in human plasma. It is derived primarily from endogenous collagen turnover and the breakdown of dietary collagen. The finding of elevated (5- to 10-fold increase from the normal of less than 50 micromoles) serum hydroxyproline is thought to be an inherited defect in the catabolism of hydroxyproline.|Elevated serum hydroxyproline appears not to cause any significant clinical symptoms. Pelkonen and Kivirikko (1970) described hydroxyprolinemia in a brother and sister. No clinical abnormality was present and the authors suggested that hydroxyprolinemia, like cystathioninuria, is a 'non-disease.' |Phang and Scriver (1989) stated that 'there is no evidence that the metabolic phenotype is a cause of clinical manifestation.' Bias of ascertainment is introduced by the fact that the hyperhydroxyprolinemia is found in patients investigated because of abnormality. They knew of reports of 6 probands.|Kim et al. (1997) prospectively studied a girl with untreated hydroxyprolinemia identified on neonatal screening and compared her with her unaffected dizygotic twin sister. In the affected twin, plasma and urine hydroxyproline were increased 10-fold and 100-fold, respectively. Both girls had normal growth. On neuropsychologic testing, the affected twin was within normal limits, performing slightly better than her sister on verbal achievement but less well on visual perceptual testing. Kim et al. (1997) concluded that hydroxyprolinemia caused no physical or cognitive deficits. They could not rule out a possible effect on visual perceptual functioning. |
237400::Scriver et al. (1966) described a somnolent convulsing male infant who had hyper-beta-alaninemia. Beta amino acids (beta-alanine, beta-amino-isobutyric acid and taurine) were excreted in excess in the urine, probably as a result of an interaction between beta-alanine and a specific cellular transport system with preference for beta-amino compounds. GABA (gamma-amino-butyric acid) was also present in the urine but this was independent of plasma levels of alanine. Postmortem tissues had elevated levels of beta-alanine and carnosine. The authors suggested a defect in beta-alanine-alpha-ketoglutarate transaminase which could expand the free beta-alanine pool and increase tissue carnosine. Beta-alanine is a central nervous system depressant. Inhibition of GABA transaminase and displacement of GABA from central nervous system binding sites may account for GABA-uria and convulsions. The parents were healthy and not related. Three half sibs were normal. One infant died 4 hours after birth with 'breathing trouble.' A fifth pregnancy ended in miscarriage. |Higgins et al. (1994) demonstrated hyper-beta-alaninemia and a pyridoxine-responsive deficiency of beta-alanyl-alpha-ketoglutarate transaminase in a 4-year-old girl with intermittent metabolic encephalopathy. Her cultured fibroblasts were more sensitive to low concentrations of beta-alanine than were those of controls. Addition of 0.1 mM of pyridoxine abolished the toxic effects of beta-alanine in the cultures. The patient was treated for 2 years with oral pyridoxine during which time she had no further seizures or somnolence. |
143890::familial hypercholesterolemia can be caused by heterozygous mutation in the low density lipoprotein receptor gene (LDLR; 606945) on chromosome 19p13. Other forms of this disorder include type B hypercholesterolemia (144010), caused by ligand-defective apolipoprotein B-100 (see APOB, 107730), and HCHOLA3 (603776), caused by mutation in the PCSK9 gene (607786).|In individuals with the LDLR mutation IVS14+1G-A (606945.0063), the phenotype can be altered by a SNP in the APOA2 gene (107670.0002), a SNP in the EPHX2 gene (132811.0001), or a SNP in the GHR gene (600946.0028). A SNP in the promoter region of the G-substrate gene (GSBS; 604088.0001) correlates with elevated plasma total cholesterol levels. A SNP in intron 17 of the ITIH4 gene (600564.0001) was associated with hypercholesterolemia susceptibility in a Japanese population.|Familial hypercholesterolemia is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by elevation of serum cholesterol bound to low density lipoprotein (LDL), which promotes deposition of cholesterol in the skin (xanthelasma), tendons (xanthomas), and coronary arteries (atherosclerosis). The disorder occurs in 2 clinical forms: homozygous and heterozygous (summary by Hobbs et al., 1992). |Individuals with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia develop tendinous xanthomas, corneal arcus, and coronary artery disease; the last usually becomes evident in the fourth or fifth decade. Homozygous individuals have a more severe clinical picture with earlier presentation, usually in the first 2 decades of life (Hobbs et al., 1992). |The ranges of serum cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol are, in mg per dl, 250-450 and 200-400 in heterozygotes, greater than 500 and greater than 450 in homozygous affecteds, and 150-250 and 75-175 in homozygous unaffecteds, with some positive correlation with age (Khachadurian, 1964; Kwiterovich et al., 1974). |In homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, the aortic root is prone to develop atherosclerotic plaque at an early age. Such plaques can accumulate in unusual sites, such as the ascending aorta and around the coronary ostia. Summers et al. (1998) evaluated the aortic root using MRI imaging in a blinded, prospective study of 17 homozygous FH patients and 12 healthy controls. When patient age and body mass index were taken into account, 53% of patients with homozygous FH had increased aortic wall thickness compared to controls; this was thought to result from a combination of medial hyperplasia and plaque formation. Supravalvular aortic stenosis was seen in 41% of patients. |Houlston et al. (1988) studied the relationship of lipoprotein(a) (152200) levels and coronary heart disease in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia. Individuals with coronary artery disease had a significantly higher mean lipoprotein(a) concentration than those without coronary heart disease, suggesting that lipoprotein(a) measurements may help predict the risk of coronary heart disease in individuals with familial hypercholesterolemia. |Deramo et al. (2003) investigated the relationship between nonarteritic ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION; 258660) and serum lipid levels in 37 consecutive patients diagnosed with NAION at or below age 50 years and 74 age- and gender-matched controls. They found that hypercholesterolemia was a risk factor in these patients and suggested that NAION might be the first manifestation of a previously unrecognized lipid disorder. The patients had experienced a focal, microvascular central nervous system ischemic event at a relatively young age. Deramo et al. (2003) suggested that aggressive treatment of lipid abnormalities might be warranted in these patients. |
222690::Whelan and Scriver (1968) reported a French-Canadian kindred in which 13 members had excessive dibasic amino aciduria of lysine, ornithine, and arginine. Inheritance was autosomal dominant. Plasma levels of these amino acids were normal. All were asymptomatic, except the proband who had mild intestinal malabsorption. |Kihara et al. (1973) described a presumed homozygote. The parents were first cousins of Italian extraction. Both parents and 9 other family members in 4 generations showed excretion patterns consistent with the heterozygous state. The homozygote was institutionalized because of mental retardation. She showed adverse reactions to 3 phenothiazines. |Bergeron and Scriver (1985) suggested that there are 2 autosomal recessive, probably nonallelic types of dibasic amino aciduria. Type I, described here, presents as profound mental retardation without hyperammonemia or protein intolerance. Heterozygotes have modest dibasic amino aciduria. Type II, also known as lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI; 222700) is most prevalent in Finns. Homozygotes have protein intolerance, hyperammonemia, and failure to thrive. Heterozygotes do not have amino aciduria.|
149400::hyperekplexia-1 (HKPX1) is caused by heterozygous, homozygous, or compound heterozygous mutation in the GLRA1 gene (138491) on chromosome 5q32.|Hyperekplexia is an early-onset neurologic disorder characterized by an exaggerated startle response to sudden, unexpected auditory or tactile stimuli. Affected individuals have brief episodes of intense, generalized hypertonia in response to stimulation. Neonates may have prolonged periods of rigidity and are at risk for sudden death from apnea or aspiration. Many affected infants have inguinal hernias. The symptoms tend to resolve after infancy, but adults may have increased startle-induced falls and/or experience nocturnal muscle jerks (summary by Ryan et al., 1992). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Hyperekplexia|See also HKPX2 (614619), caused by mutation in the GLRB gene (138492) on chromosome 4q31; HKPX3 (614618), caused by mutation in the GLYT2 gene (SLC6A5; 604159) on chromosome 11p15; and HKPX4 (618011), caused by mutation in the ATAD1 gene (614452) on chromsome 10q23.|Hyperekplexia can also occur in early infantile epileptic encephalopathy-8 (EIEE8; 300607), caused by mutation in the ARHGEF9 gene (300429).|See also sporadic stiff-man syndrome (184850) and the 'Jumping Frenchmen of Maine' (244100).|Ryan et al. (1992) suggested that this disorder was first described by Kirstein and Silfverskiold (1958), who reported a 'family with emotionally precipitated drop seizures.' |Suhren et al. (1966) described a family in which 25 persons spanning 5 generations with numerous instances of male-to-male transmission had transient congenital hypertonia that disappeared with sleep; hypertonia diminished during the first year of life. Later in life, affected individuals showed greatly exaggerated startle responses, which were sometimes associated with falling, markedly hyperactive brainstem reflexes (e.g., head retraction, palmomental and snout reflexes), and a momentary generalized jerking on falling asleep. The authors suggested an uninhibited nociceptive reflex pattern as a result of a defect in maturation. Barbiturate medication resulted in improvement. See also Kok and Bruyn (1962) (Kok and Suhren are the same person Went, 1974).|Klein et al. (1972) reported a family in which 10 persons spanning 3 generations had a congenital form of stiff-man syndrome. Affected members had attacks of stiffness precipitated by surprise or minor physical contact and characterized by difficulty in making sudden movements; signs of myotonia or myokymia were not present. During the episodes, EMG showed continuous activity at rest with normal action potentials. The continuous electrical activity was abolished by diazepam. X-linkage could not be excluded because there was no male-to-male transmission. Sander et al. (1980) reported a large family with dominantly inherited congenital stiff-man syndrome. Affected infants were hypertonic at birth, but their tone became almost normal by 3 years of age. Stiffness reappeared at adolescence, often precipitated by sudden movement or cold. Sander et al. (1980) stated that the inherited form of the disorder is benign and that the sporadic form is more severe. |Lingam et al. (1981) reported an affected family and suggested the term 'stiff-baby syndrome.' They noted that affected infants tend to look alert, frightened, and tense, and have a tendency to vomit due to hiatal hernias. |In a family described by Morley et al. (1982), affected persons showed flexor hypertonia and hypokinesia during infancy. Later and throughout life, they showed an exaggerated startle reaction with involuntary myoclonus (occasionally resulting in a fall) and marked nocturnal myoclonic jerks. Morley et al. (1982) noted a high frequency of congenital dislocation of the hip and of inguinal hernia. The neurologic features could be controlled with clonazepam. Markand et al. (1984) examined 12 of 15 affected members of the family reported by Morley et al. (1982). Startles were best elicited by lightly touching the patient's nose, clapping or making other noises, or suddenly jolting the patient's chair. Electrophysiologic studies found a prominent C response 60 to 75 ms after median and peroneal nerve stimulation. The authors suggested that hyperactive long-loop reflexes may be the physiologic basis for the exaggerated startle. |Saenz-Lope et al. (1984) identified the disorder, which they referred to as 'hyperekplexia,' in 5 of 7 children (3 brothers and 2 sisters) born to unrelated parents. No other members of the family were affected. Clonazepam was ineffective, whereas valproic acid, 5-hydroxytryptophan, or piracetam markedly reduced the abnormal startle. |Ryan et al. (1989) identified a 5-generation kindred in which 30 of 52 persons at risk were affected with this disorder. Continuous and occasionally fatal muscular rigidity was present in infancy and electromyography showed continuous motor unit activity. An exaggerated startle response persisted throughout life; sudden, unexpected acoustic or tactile stimuli could precipitate a brief attack of intense rigidity with falling. Umbilical and inguinal hernias, presumably due to increased intraabdominal pressure, were common, as was nocturnal myoclonus. Dramatic improvement of symptoms followed treatment with clonazepam. Based on EMG findings, Ryan et al. (1989) concluded that startle disease and hereditary stiff-man syndrome are identical disorders.|Hayashi et al. (1991) reported 2 unrelated Japanese families with hyperekplexia. The 9 affected members had various combinations of transient infantile hypertonia and hypokinesia, exaggerated startle response with falling episodes, nocturnal myoclonus, an easily elicited head retraction reflex, hip dislocation, and umbilical hernia. Treatment with clonazepam was effective in infants and children. |Dubowitz et al. (1992) reported the case of a newborn infant with classic features of startle disease in whom the cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) were substantially lower than normal during the first weeks of life. She improved greatly on clonazepam treatment. Dubowitz et al. (1992) suggested that the signs of this disorder may be due to a genetic defect or to delayed maturation resulting in low CSF GABA. The disorder may be confused with seizure disorder, but it does not have concomitant discharges on EEG. |Milani et al. (1996) demonstrated a variable combination of clinical signs of hereditary hyperekplexia in an Italian family. The 1-year-old proband had excessive startle response, muscular hypertonia, and a continuing flexion state, whereas only startle response during early infancy was found in the mother, aged 30 years. The proband's second cousin died at the age of 45 days from apnea following myoclonic fits, and her father displayed hypertonia and muscle stiffening. No history of infantile hypertonia was recorded in the grandparents of either the proband or the affected second cousin. In affected members of this family, Milani et al. (1996) identified a mutation in the GLRA1 gene (138491.0005). |
614462::hyperglycinemia, lactic acidosis, and seizures (HGCLAS), also known as pyruvate dehydrogenase lipoic acid synthetase deficiency (PDHLD), is caused by homozygous mutation in the LIAS gene (607031) on chromosome 4p14.|Hyperglycinemia, lactic acidosis, and seizures is a severe autosomal recessive disorder characterized by onset of hypotonia and seizures associated with increased serum glycine and lactate in the first days of life. Affected individuals develop an encephalopathy or severely delayed psychomotor development, which may result in death in childhood. The disorder represents a form of 'variant' nonketotic hyperglycinemia and is distinct from classic nonketotic hyperglycinemia (NKH, or GCE; 605899), which is characterized by significantly increased CSF glycine. Several forms of 'variant' NKH, including HGCLAS, appear to result from defects of mitochondrial lipoate biosynthesis (summary by Baker et al., 2014). |Mayr et al. (2011) reported a boy, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, with a severe metabolic disorder resulting in death at age 4 years. He developed seizures on day 3 of life, and showed hypotonia and poor sucking. His condition worsened, and he developed recurrent apneas and reduced consciousness associated with increased serum lactate. On day 11 of life, he had further metabolic deterioration, with acute respiratory deficiency necessitating artificial ventilation for 17 days; chest radiographs showed an infiltration of the lungs. Initial brain imaging had been normal, but he developed severe brain edema at this time. Urinalysis showed increased glutaric acid and glycine, and plasma glycine was also increased. Brain sonography showed multicystic encephalopathy and hydrocephalus ex vacuo, which was likely secondary to the metabolic crisis. Echocardiography showed a mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. After this episode, the child had severely retarded psychomotor development, contractures, spastic tetraparesis, epilepsy, microcephaly, sleep disturbances, and intermittently increased serum lactate. He died at home from a respiratory tract infection. |Baker et al. (2014) reported 2 unrelated children who presented in the first days of life with hypotonia and seizures. A Somalian girl, born of consanguineous parents, had a severe disease course with failure to thrive, microcephaly, severe psychomotor retardation, myoclonus, and spasticity resulting in death at 2 years 8 months of age. Brain imaging showed cerebral atrophy of the cortex and white matter, as well as multiple signal abnormalities in the subcortical and cerebellar regions. The other child, a boy born of unrelated Turkish parents, responded to antiseizure medication and had his last seizure at age 12 years, but had delayed psychomotor development. His sister presented at birth with hypotonia and seizures, and died at age 7 months. All 3 patients had increased serum glycine; lactate was increased in the 1 patient in whom it was measured. Studies of cells from the 2 probands showed decreased activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex with absent or decreased lipoylated E2 subunits. Patient cells also showed absent activity of the glycine cleavage enzyme system. Mitochondrial respiratory chain enzymes were normal in patient fibroblasts. |
256450::familial hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia-1 (HHF1) is caused by homozygous, compound heterozygous, or heterozygous mutation in the ABCC8 gene (600509), encoding the SUR1 subunit of the pancreatic beta cell inwardly rectifying potassium channel, on chromosome 11p15.|Familial hyperinsulinism, also referred to as congenital hyperinsulinism, nesidioblastosis, or persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (PPHI), is the most common cause of persistent hypoglycemia in infancy and is due to defective negative feedback regulation of insulin secretion by low glucose levels. Unless early and aggressive intervention is undertaken, brain damage from recurrent episodes of hypoglycemia may occur (Thornton et al., 1998). |HHF2 (601820) is caused by mutation in the KCNJ11 gene (600937) on chromosome 11p15. HHF3 (602485) is caused by mutation in the glucokinase gene (GCK; 138079) on chromosome 7p13. HHF4 (609975) is caused by mutation in the HADH gene (601609) on chromosome 4q25. HHF5 (609968) is caused by mutation in the insulin receptor gene (INSR; 147670) on chromosome 19p13. HHF6 (606762) is caused by mutation in the GLUD1 gene (138130) on chromosome 10q23. HHF7 (610021) is caused by mutation in the SLC16A1 (600682) on chromosome 1p13. There is evidence of further genetic heterogeneity of HHF.|The term nesidioblastosis (meaning neoformation of islets of Langerhans from pancreatic duct epithelium) was coined by Laidlaw (1938) to describe the diffuse abnormality of the pancreas in which there is extensive, often disorganized formation of new islets. 'Nesidio' comes from a Greek word for islet. Yakovac et al. (1971) was first to report nesidioblastosis in a series of infants with intractable hypoglycemia. Woo et al. (1976) reported sibs. Schwartz et al. (1979) observed the disorder in 5 children of both sexes from 2 families with unaffected parents. The disorder presented as severe neonatal hypoglycemia. Pancreatectomy was required. |Dahms et al. (1980) recognized 2 histologic groups of nesidioblastosis among cases of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia: group I had diffuse hyperplasia of the islets of Langerhans as well as nesidioblastosis; group II had more subtle nesidioblastosis alone. Group I patients were 8 months old or younger. Group II patients ranged in age from 3 to 15 years. Four of the group I patients had the Beckwith EMG syndrome (130650). Wuthrich et al. (1986) described affected sibs. Moreno et al. (1989) described the disorder in a brother and sister whose parents were consanguineous. In addition, a brother and sister who died in the neonatal period were probably affected. Glaser et al. (1990) reported a total of 21 cases in 7 pedigrees, which included a large Bedouin family, an Arab family, and 5 Jewish families of Eastern European origin (Ashkenazi). Consanguinity was evident in the Bedouin and Arab families. Woolf et al. (1991) found consanguineous parentage in 5 of 28 families. Segregation analysis showed that the ratio of subsequent affected to unaffected sibs was similar to that expected of an autosomal recessive condition. The sex ratio was close to 1. |Of 26 families seen over a period of 15 years, Thornton et al. (1991) found that 5 had more than 1 affected child (19%). There were no consistent clinical, biochemical, or histologic differences between patients in the 5 multiplex and 21 simplex families. The segregation ratio, 0.254, agreed closely with that expected for an autosomal recessive disorder. Pancreatic histologic data were available for 22 of the 25 patients who underwent pancreatectomy. Differing histologic findings were found in 3 infants in 1 family and 2 in another family; both within and among multiplex families, there was no consistency of the histologic change. Four of the simplex cases had an adenoma; all were cured by its removal. None of these patients had additional histologic abnormalities. Thornton et al. (1991) commented that multiple cases of adenoma had not been reported in sibships. On the basis of their large pathologic and clinical review, Rahier et al. (1984) also suggested that adenomas constitute a separate cause of persistent neonatal hypoglycemia. The variable histologic changes suggested that it is not the specific histologic changes that are genetically determined but rather an abnormality of regulation of the beta cells. Rahier (1989) discussed the relevance of pancreatic histologic changes in patients with hyperinsulinism. Horev et al. (1991) described a family in which 4 of 13 children had hyperinsulinism with variable outcomes. One sib required pancreatectomy and 3 were treated successfully with diazoxide and were able to discontinue this therapy between ages 1 and 2 years. |Burman et al. (1992) described a brother and sister, aged 42 and 34, respectively, with recurrent syncope due to severe hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. Exploratory laparotomy in the brother showed a grossly normal pancreas, but histologic examination showed islet cell hyperplasia. In adults, islet cell hyperplasia occurs almost exclusively in multiple endocrine neoplasia type I (131100); however, neither sib had any evidence of MEN I and there was no family history to suggest this diagnosis. Because the brother related his symptoms to exercise, Burman et al. (1992) used treadmill exercise in both patients to diagnose hyperinsulinism and to observe its response to therapy. |Bianchi et al. (1992) described the prenatal diagnosis of nesidioblastosis on the basis of high levels of insulin and C-peptide and low values of glucose in the amniotic fluid. The diagnosis was suspected because of the previous unexplained death of twins in utero at 8 months' gestation followed by the birth of a macrosomic female (4200 g) who showed persistent neonatal hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, treated by subtotal pancreatectomy, on the twenty-first day of life. The histology confirmed the presence of nesidioblastosis. During the pregnancy in question, an accelerated growth rate was noticed on echo examinations. Because of the findings in the amniotic fluid at 30 and 35 weeks' gestation, prompt therapy could be instituted at the birth of the child. Aparicio et al. (1993) likewise achieved prenatal diagnosis of familial neonatal hyperinsulinemia. Three sibs were affected. Infant A was macrosomic and stillborn. Infant B was macrosomic at birth following a pregnancy uncomplicated by maternal diabetes. Following diagnosis of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, the patient was treated with oral diazoxide with continuation of therapy until hyperinsulinemia was resolved by age 2 years. The pregnancy with infant C was closely monitored with ultrasonography and amniocentesis. Based on these results, infant C was delivered immediately upon obtaining evidence of lung maturation. Neonatal hyperinsulinemia was confirmed by a markedly increased cord plasma insulin concentration. |Kukuvitis et al. (1997) reported a French-Canadian kindred with documented hypoglycemia in 5 first cousins who responded well to diazoxide. In 2 patients, inappropriately elevated insulin levels during hypoglycemia were documented. The familial clustering suggested an autosomal dominant form of PHHI. |Thornton et al. (1998) described 3 families with vertical transmission of hyperinsulinism of infancy, suggesting autosomal dominant inheritance. This form of the disorder appeared to be both phenotypically and genetically distinct from autosomal recessive persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy. There were at least 2 instances of male-to-male transmission. One family had 4 affected generations. The first and largest family was brought to attention by an infant girl who was found to be hypoglycemic on the second day of life. She was born at term, weighing 3,900 gm. Hypoglycemia was successfully controlled with diazoxide. An older brother was evaluated with a fast at the age of 5.5 years and developed hypoglycemia. The father and an uncle had been diagnosed as having hypoglycemia of infancy and previously reported (Stanley and Baker, 1976). They had been seen at the ages of 8 months and 6 months, respectively. Subtotal pancreatectomy failed to control hypoglycemia in the father. When diazoxide became available, he responded well, and hypoglycemia was subsequently well controlled. The uncle also experienced good control of hypoglycemia with diazoxide, which was available at the time of his diagnosis. The grandmother of the proposita was first diagnosed with this condition at age 40. She had a history of symptoms compatible with fasting hypoglycemia as early as her teen years and recalled that her father had episodes of unexplained coma. Although none were receiving treatment, all 3 affected adults in this family continued to show evidence of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia during prolonged fasting in adulthood, and the father of the index patient was hypoglycemic after ingestion of high-protein meals. Thornton et al. (1998) noted that the clinical features of patients with autosomal dominant hyperinsulinism are considerably milder than those of patients with autosomal recessive disease. They compared 11 patients from these 3 apparent autosomal dominant inheritance pattern families with those of 14 patients with autosomal recessive hyperinsulinism linked to the Sur1 gene who were investigated in the same hospital: the median age of onset was 1 year and 1 day, respectively; birth weight was 3.3 and 4.6 kg, respectively; and response to diet and diazoxide was observed in 10 of the autosomal dominant cases and none of the autosomal recessive cases. |Service et al. (1999) described 5 adults with neuroglycopenic episodes from hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia within 4 hours of meal ingestion and negative 72-hour fasts. Each had negative transabdominal ultrasonography, spiral computed tomographic scanning, and celiac axis angiography of the pancreas. However, all showed positive selective arterial calcium stimulation tests indicative of pancreatic beta-cell hyperfunction. At pancreatic exploration, no insulinoma was detected by intraoperative ultrasonography and complete mobilization and palpation of the pancreas. Moreover, the resected pancreata showed islet hypertrophy and nesidioblastosis, but no insulinoma. No definite disease-causing mutation was detected in the Kir6.2 or SUR1 genes, which encode the subunits of the pancreatic ATP-sensitive potassium channel responsible for glucose-induced insulin secretion. |Glaser et al. (1999) reviewed the diagnostic tests, diagnostic criteria, and treatment approaches to PHHI. They suggested that the diagnostic criteria include the following: (1) blood glucose levels less than 48 mg/dl; (2) nonsuppressed insulin levels during hypoglycemia; (3) inappropriately low free fatty acids and ketone bodies during hypoglycemia; (4) glycemic response of greater than 30 mg/dl to 0.03 mg/kg glucagon injection; (5) glucose requirement to maintain euglycemia greater than 15 mg/kg-min; and (6) absence of ketone bodies in urine. |Focal Adenomatous Hyperplasia|Two types of histopathologic lesions are associated with hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, a focal form and a diffuse form, which have a similar clinical presentation. The focal form, present in approximately 30% of cases, is characterized by focal hyperplasia of islet-like cells, including hypertrophied insulin cells with giant nuclei. In the diffuse form, all the islets of Langerhans throughout the pancreas are irregular in shape and contain distinctly hypertrophied insulin cells. These 2 forms can be distinguished by pancreatic venous sampling, and preoperative extemporaneous histologic examination can determine whether subtotal or partial pancreatectomy is required (Dubois et al., 1995). Sixteen infants with sporadic PHHI resistant to diazoxide, who had undergone pancreatectomy, were investigated by de Lonlay et al. (1997). Venous sampling and histologic studies during surgery allowed identification of 10 cases of the focal form and 6 cases of the diffuse form. De Lonlay et al. (1997) showed that in cases of the focal form, but not those of the diffuse form, there was specific loss of maternal alleles of the imprinted chromosome region 11p15 in cells of the hyperplastic area of the pancreas but not in normal pancreatic cells. This somatic event was consistent with a proliferative monoclonal lesion. It involves disruption of the balance between monoallelic expression of several maternally and paternally expressed genes. Thus, they provided the first molecular explanation for the heterogeneity of sporadic forms of PHHI such that it is possible to perform only partial pancreatectomy, limited to the focal somatic lesion, so as to avoid iatrogenic diabetes in patients with focal adenomatous hyperplasia. It is possible that in these cases of somatic loss of maternal 11p15.1, there is reduction to homozygosity for a recessive SUR1 or KCNJ11 mutation on the paternal allele, since both SUR1 and KCNJ11 are located in the 11p15.1 region. |Verkarre et al. (1998) found that paternal mutation of the SUR1 gene and maternal loss of 11p15 imprinted genes lead to persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy in focal adenomatous hyperplasia. |De Lonlay-Debeney et al. (1999) studied 52 neonates with hyperinsulinism who were treated surgically: 30 with diffuse beta cell hyperfunction, and 22 with focal adenomatous islet cell hyperplasia. The type and location of the pancreatic lesions were determined by preoperative pancreatic catheterization and intraoperative histologic studies. Partial pancreatectomy was performed in infants with focal lesions, and near-total pancreatectomy was performed in those with diffuse lesions. Among the patients with focal hyperinsulinism, the lesions were in the head of the pancreas in 9, the isthmus in 3, the body in 8, and the tail in 2. After partial pancreatectomy, the infants with focal lesions had no symptoms of hypoglycemia and had normal preprandial and postprandial plasma glucose and glycosylated hemoglobin values and normal results on oral glucose-tolerance tests. By contrast, after near-total pancreatectomy, 13 of the patients with diffuse lesions had persistent hypoglycemia, 8 developed type I diabetes mellitus, and 7 developed hyperglycemia; overall, only 2 patients with diffuse lesions had normal plasma glucose concentrations in the first year after surgery. |
606762::familial hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia-6 (HHF6) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) gene (GLUD1; 138130) on chromosome 10q23.For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of familial hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, see HHF1 (256450).|A distinct syndrome of hyperinsulinism and hyperammonemia in 3 unrelated children was described by Zammarchi et al. (1996) and Weinzimer et al. (1997). In addition, Zammarchi et al. (1996) suggested that the defect involved leucine hypersensitivity. Hsu et al. (2001) studied 8 children and 6 adults with hypoglycemia due to congenital hyperinsulinism combined with persistent unexplained hyperammonemia. In each of these cases, known metabolic disorders were ruled out. All had dominantly expressed mutations of glutamine dehydrogenase and plasma concentrations of ammonium that were 2 to 5 times normal. The median age at onset of hypoglycemia in the 14 patients was 9 months; diagnosis was delayed beyond age 2 years in 6 patients, and 4 were not given a diagnosis until adulthood. Fasting tests revealed unequivocal evidence of hyperinsulinism in only 1 of 7 patients. Three did not develop hypoglycemia until 12 to 24 hours of fasting; however, all 7 demonstrated inappropriate glycemic responses to glucagon that were characteristic of hyperinsulinism. In response to oral protein, all 12 patients with hyperinsulinism/hyperammonemia showed a fall in blood glucose compared with none of 5 control subjects. Insulin responses to protein loading were similar in the patients with hyperinsulinism/hyperammonemia and control subjects. Hsu et al. (2001) concluded that the postprandial blood glucose response to a protein meal is more sensitive than prolonged fasting for detecting hypoglycemia in the hyperinsulinism/hyperammonemia syndrome. |Kelly et al. (2001) postulated that children with hyperinsulinism/hyperammonemia syndrome would have exaggerated acute insulin responses to leucine in the postabsorptive state. As hyperglycemia increases beta-cell guanosine triphosphate (GTP), they also postulated that high glucose concentrations would extinguish abnormal responsiveness to leucine in hyperinsulinism/hyperammonemia syndrome patients. After an overnight fast, 7 patients had acute insulin response to leucine administered intravenously. Four patients then had acute insulin responses to leucine repeated at hyperglycemia. High blood glucose suppressed their abnormal baseline acute insulin responses to leucine. The authors concluded that protein-induced hypoglycemia in hyperinsulinism/hyperammonemia syndrome patients may be prevented by carbohydrate loading before protein consumption. |De Lonlay et al. (2001) studied 12 unrelated patients with hyperinsulinism and hyperammonemia and observed clinically heterogeneous phenotypes, with neonatal- and infancy-onset hypoglycemia and variable responsiveness to medical (diazoxide) and dietary (leucine-restricted diet) treatment. Hyperammonemia was constant and not influenced by oral protein, by protein- and leucine-restricted diet, or by sodium benzoate or N-carbamylglutamate administration. Mean basal GDH activity in cultured lymphocytes did not differ between patients and controls, but the sensitivity of GDH activity to inhibition by GTP was reduced in all patient lymphoblast cultures. The activating effect of leucine on GDH activity varied among the patients; 4 patients had a significant decrease of sensitivity that correlated with a negative clinical response to dietary leucine. |Ihara et al. (2005) reported a Japanese girl who presented in infancy with delayed growth and hyperammonemia. Liver biopsy showed decreased activity of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase-1 (CPS1; 608307), and she was given a diagnosis of CPS1 deficiency (237300) based on enzymatic studies. Her blood glucose was relatively low on retrospective analysis. Treatment with protein restriction, sodium benzoate, and arginine failed to reduce the ammonia throughout childhood. At age 15 years, she showed borderline intelligence, and biochemical studies showed low serum glucose and inappropriately high insulin. The correct diagnosis of hyperinsulinism-hyperammonemia syndrome due to a de novo heterozygous GLUD1 mutation was confirmed by genetic analysis (S445L; 138130.0002). Ihara et al. (2005) could not explain the secondary CPS1 enzymatic deficiency in this patient, but suggested that the urea cycle may not have been functioning sufficiently in this patient. |
238600::type I hyperlipoproteinemia is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the lipoprotein lipase gene (LPL; 609708) on chromosome 8p21.|Holt et al. (1939) first reported the familial occurrence of this syndrome. Boggs et al. (1957) described 3 affected sibs from a first-cousin mating. Massive hyperchylomicronemia occurs when the patient is on a normal diet and disappears completely in a few days on fat-free feeding. On a normal diet alpha and beta lipoproteins are low. A defect in removal of chylomicrons (fat induction) and of other triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (carbohydrate induction) is present. Decreased plasma postheparin lipolytic activity (PHLA) is demonstrated. Low tissue activity of lipoprotein lipase was suspected. The full-blown disease, manifested by attacks of abdominal pain, hepatosplenomegaly, eruptive xanthomas, and lactescence of the plasma, is a recessive. Heterozygotes may show slight hyperlipemia and reduced PHLA. Precocious atherosclerosis does not seem to be a feature. |Havel and Gordon (1960) first recognized deficiency of lipoprotein lipase (triacylglycerol acylhydrolase; EC 3.1.1.3) as the basic defect in type I hyperlipoproteinemia. The type I hyperlipoproteinemia phenotype can also result from deficiency of the activator of lipoprotein lipase, apolipoprotein C-II (Breckenridge et al., 1978)--see 207750. This condition was called fat-induced hypertriglyceridemia by Nevin and Slack (1968). Adipose tissue in heterozygotes shows intermediate levels of lipoprotein lipase. |Berger (1987) reported a case of variant lipoprotein lipase deficiency in which muscle lipoprotein lipase was essentially normal although the enzyme in adipose tissue was markedly reduced. Schreibman et al. (1973) studied a family with 2 clinically typical sibs whose lipoprotein lipase showed abnormal substrate specificity and kinetics. Hoeg et al. (1983) reported an extraordinary patient in whom the diagnosis was first made at the age of 75. Absolute abstinence from alcohol and a self-imposed low-fat diet may have been responsible for the long survival. Since childhood, he had had recurrent abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, diagnosed as 'gall bladder attacks,' until age 48 when he was first hospitalized. During the next 15 years he had 1 to 3 episodes of abdominal pain per year necessitating hospitalization. These episodes were diagnosed as acute pancreatitis and were sometimes associated with an evanescent papular rash. Jaundice that developed rapidly at age 64 was found to be due to bile duct stenosis, which was surgically relieved. He had, at age 73, ischemic heart disease and a femoral bruit. |Eckel (1989) provided an extensive review of lipoprotein lipase. Auwerx et al. (1989) classified LPL deficiency at the protein level on the basis of the absence (class I) or presence of defective enzyme protein, and whether it binds (class II) or does not bind (class III) to heparin. |Slight to moderate hemolysis is often present in plasma from patients with primary LPL deficiency. Cantin et al. (1995) found that, while osmotic fragility was similar to that in control subjects, plasma prehemoglobin was significantly increased. Furthermore, an increase in plasma lysophosphatidylcholine concentration was found. This was thought to be due to an impairment in the reverse metabolic pathway converting lysophosphatidylcholine back to phosphatidylcholine. The findings, along with a positive correlation between plasma prehemoglobin and lysophosphatidylcholine levels, suggested that the hemolysis in LPL deficiency is mediated to some extent by the abnormally elevated concentration of lysophosphatidylcholine. |Feoli-Fonseca et al. (1998) reviewed the cases of 16 infants under 1 year of age who were found to have LPL deficiency; 7 presented with irritability, 2 with lower intestinal bleeding, 5 with pallor, anemia, or splenomegaly, and 2 with a family history or fortuitous discovery. All plasma samples were lactescent at presentation. |Kawashiri et al. (2005) reported a 22-year-old Japanese male with this mutation who had had no major pancreatic malformations, vascular complications, or severe glucose intolerance despite a 32-year clinical history of pancreatitis recurring more than 20 times. Based on the long-term observations of this patient, Kawashiri et al. (2005) proposed that LPL deficiency is not invariably associated with high mortality and that even with repeated episodes of acute pancreatitis, pancreatic function may be slow to decline. |
238700::hyperlysinemia type I is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde synthase gene (AASS; 605113) on chromosome 7q31.|Hyperlysinemia type I is an autosomal recessive metabolic condition with variable clinical features. Some patients who present in infancy with nonspecific seizures, hypotonia, or mildly delayed psychomotor development have been found to have increased serum lysine and pipecolic acid on laboratory analysis. However, about 50% of probands are reported to be asymptomatic, and hyperlysinemia is generally considered to be a benign metabolic variant (summary by Tondo et al., 2013; Houten et al., 2013). |The AASS gene encodes a bifunctional enzyme: lysine alpha-ketoglutarate reductase and saccharopine dehydrogenase. In hyperlysinemia type I, both enzymatic functions of AASS are defective; in hyperlysinemia type II, also known as saccharopinuria (268700), some of the first enzymatic function is retained (Cox, 1985; Cox et al., 1985).|Ghadimi et al. (1965) found hyperlysinemia in 2 unrelated mentally retarded patients, one of whom was the product of father-daughter incest. The level of lysine in the cerebrospinal fluid was also elevated. Blood levels rose abnormally with lysine loading. A block in the metabolism of lysine was postulated. The patients were aged 2 and 27 years. Impaired sexual development, lax ligaments and muscles, convulsions in early life, and perhaps mild anemia were features. |Woody (1964) found elevated lysine in the blood and spinal fluid of a physically and mentally retarded girl with convulsions, muscular and ligamentous asthenia, and normocytic, normochromic anemia which responded to dietary restriction of lysine. Woody (1964) suggested that incorporation of lysine into protein was defective. An ostensibly normal cousin also had hyperlysinuria. The parents of the proband were related. |Dancis et al. (1969) demonstrated reduced lysine:alpha-ketoglutarate reductase activity in skin fibroblasts from 3 affected sibs. Subluxation of the lenses developed in some of the patients (Woody, 1971; Smith et al., 1971). The hyperlysinemia in the cases studied by Dancis et al. (1969) was more marked than that in other reported cases such as that of Ghadimi et al. (1965), yet the latter cases were more severely retarded. |Colombo et al. (1964) described episodic vomiting, rigidity, and coma in an infant, which was relieved by a low protein diet. During coma, ammonia was high in the blood and the amino acids lysine and arginine were also high. Defect in degradation of lysine was proposed. Lysine is a potent competitive inhibitor of arginase. As a result, urea synthesis and ammonia detoxication are interfered with. Colombo et al. (1967) demonstrated a defect in L-lysine:NAD-oxido-reductase activity in liver. This apparently is responsible for accumulation of lysine. Scriver (1987) concluded that the disorder described by Colombo et al. (1964) is the same as hyperlysinemia.|Cederbaum et al. (1979) reported a 7-year-old boy with mild developmental delay, hyperactivity, and speech delay who was found to have increased serum and urinary lysine and saccharopine. Saccharopine was also present in cerebrospinal fluid. Initial studies suggested cystinuria, but further analysis indicated that the amino acid was saccharopine. Patient fibroblasts showed undetectable activities of both lysine ketoglutarate reductase and saccharopine dehydrogenase. Reexamination of the urine of previously studied cases of this double enzyme deficiency (Dancis et al., 1976) suggested that saccharopinuria of variable degree is the rule and not the exception in patients with hyperlysinemia. |Dancis et al. (1983) reviewed 10 cases of familial hyperlysinemia with lysine:alpha-ketoglutarate reductase deficiency, identified through newborn screening programs or family surveys. No adverse mental or physical effects could be attributed to the hyperlysinemic mother. Treatment with low protein diet was not found to be warranted. In addition, a child with no clinical manifestations of hyperlysinemia was born to an affected mother. |Further study of the patients reported by Woody (1964), inbred Louisiana Cajuns, revealed that 2 successive enzymes in the major pathway of lysine degradation are deficient, i.e., lysine ketoglutarate reductase (Dancis et al., 1969) and saccharopine dehydrogenase (Cox et al., 1975; Dancis et al., 1976), the first 2 steps in the mammalian lysine degradation pathway, suggesting the existence of a bifunctional enzyme encoded by a single locus. |Tondo et al. (2013) reported 2 unrelated children with hyperlysinemia type I. Both presented in infancy with seizures and were found to have increased lysine in serum, urine, and cerebrospinal fluids. Pipecolic acid was also increased in serum and urine, whereas ornithine was decreased. The patients had mild cognitive impairment, with poor speech, hyperactivity, and poor attention span. One patient had optic nerve hypoplasia and fine motor deficits. Brain MRI showed no abnormalities, and neither patient had dysmorphic features. A lysine-restricted diet yielded mild improvement in symptoms and laboratory abnormalities, but was difficult to follow and did not reverse cognitive impairment. |Houten et al. (2013) directly sequenced the AASS gene in a sample of 8 patients with hyperlysinemia who were identified retrospectively from a cohort of patient samples sent for metabolic screening due to a variety of distinct neurologic abnormalities. Biallelic mutations or deletions involving the AASS gene were identified in all samples (see, e.g., 605113.0006 and 605113.0007). Patient fibroblasts showed no detectable lysine alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase or saccharopine dehydrogenase activity, and immunoblot analysis detected AASS at decreased levels in only 1 patient; the others had no detectable AASS protein. Patients had been referred for a variety of reasons, including delayed psychomotor development, failure to thrive, spastic tetraparesis or diplegia, seizures, hypotonia, and hyperactivity. Some patients had dysmorphic features. There was no definitive common phenotype among the referred patients except for increased serum lysine. Houten et al. (2013) concluded that the hyperlysinemia in these individuals resulted from mutations in the AASS gene; however, given the broad range of clinical features and the presence of consanguinity in several families, there was not strong evidence for causality. |
247950::In a 21-month-old Japanese girl with physical and mental retardation, Omura et al. (1976) found excessive lysine in the urine, low lysine in the serum, and impaired intestinal absorption of lysine. They postulated a specific defect in lysine transport in the intestine and renal tubule. No information on the family was recorded. |
613280::hypermanganesemia with dystonia-1 (HMNDYT1) is caused by homozygous mutation in the SLC30A10 gene (611146) on chromosome 1q41.|Hypermanganesemia with dystonia-1 is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder characterized by increased serum manganese, motor neurodegeneration with extrapyramidal features, polycythemia, and hepatic dysfunction, which leads to cirrhosis in some cases. Intellectual function is preserved (summary by Tuschl et al., 2012 and Quadri et al., 2012). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Hypermanganesemia With Dystonia,See also HMNDYT2 (617013), caused by mutation in the SLC39A14 gene (608736) on chromosome 8p21.|Tuschl et al. (2008) reported an Arabic girl with a constellation of clinical features consisting of hypermanganesemia, liver cirrhosis, an extrapyramidal motor disorder, and polycythemia. She was born to healthy first-cousin parents. The pregnancy, delivery, and neonatal period were uneventful, and her development was normal until the age of 2 years, when difficulty with walking became apparent. This corrected itself until she presented again with walking difficulties at age 11. Her motor problems affected both her gait and fine movements of her hands. Apart from the movement disorder, her general physical health and development were normal for age. At 12 years of age her height and weight were at the 50th percentile, but her head circumference was 50.1 cm (2nd percentile). She showed mild icterus but no stigmata of chronic liver disease; liver and spleen were normal. Neurologic exam showed toe walking, increased tone of all 4 extremities, and dysdiadochokinesis. There was no dysmetria. Ocular exam was normal with no evidence of Kayser-Fleischer rings. She had polycythemia with a hemoglobin of 18 g/dl, unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, and increased blood manganese concentrations (3,285 nmol/L, normal less than 320 nmol/L). Total iron binding capacity was increased. Plasma copper and zinc levels were normal. Prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time were somewhat prolonged. Liver biopsy showed bridging fibrosis and cirrhosis with patchy moderate to severe portal and periportal chronic inflammatory cell infiltrate. Abdominal ultrasound showed an enlarged liver with coarse echotexture and a mildly enlarged spleen suggestive of cirrhosis and early portal hypertension. Hepatic manganese content was elevated (3.4 microg/g wet weight, normal 1-2 microg/g). Muscle biopsy was microscopically normal, but manganese content was elevated 3-fold. Copper was borderline high in both liver and muscle but not in the range of Wilson disease (277900). MRI of the brain showed hyperintense signal from the anterior pituitary, caudate, lentiform, and dentate nuclei and cerebellar white matter in the T1 sequence but normal T2 sequence consistent with manganese deposition in these regions. MRI of the spine was unremarkable. The patient had 4 healthy brothers and 3 healthy sisters; 1 older brother died at the age of 18 years from gastrointestinal hemorrhage secondary to cirrhosis. His clinical course was very similar to that of his sister, including microcephaly and MRI showing manganese deposition in the basal ganglia. Tuschl et al. (2008) excluded mutation in the ATP2C2 (613082) and ATP2A3 (601929) genes as the cause of the disorder in their patient.|Gospe et al. (2000) reported a 14-year-old white male, the product of a nonconsanguineous union, who presented with stiffness of gait and progressive leg weakness. He had spastic paraparesis of the lower extremities. MRI of the spinal cord was normal but MRI of the brain showed high signal in the lenticular and dentate nuclei, brain stem, and pituitary, consistent with deposition of manganese. Brain stem atrophy was also present. Whole-blood manganese measured 3.48 micromol/l. There was no evidence of environmental exposure. His liver biopsy showed evidence of micronodular cirrhosis with no evidence of steatosis or of increased iron storage. There was no indication of hepatic copper deposition. Liver manganese concentration was approximately 3 times normal. During 11 years of clinical observation, the patient had progressive spastic weakness of the legs leading to loss of ambulation and painful extensor spasms. Whole-blood magnesium ranged from 2.93 to 3.66 micromol/l. The patient had persistent polycythemia, requiring phlebotomy twice weekly. Lechpammer et al. (2014) reported postmortem examination results on this patient, who died of pneumonia at age 38 years. The liver showed hepatomegaly with micronodular cirrhosis with portal hypertension manifest by congestive splenomegaly and esophageal varices. Many hepatocytes contained a finely granular brown-orange pigment. Western blot analysis showed decreased levels of SLC30A10. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was also observed, with granular rhodanine-positive accumulates in rare myocytes. The basal ganglia showed severe neuronal loss in the globus pallidus, and there was deposition of rhodanine-positive brown pigment in residual neurons and astrocytes. Other findings included reactive astrocytosis, myelin loss, and spongiosis. Similar features were observed in the putamen, caudate nucleus, thalamus, and cerebellum. There was diffuse reactive gliosis throughout the white matter with axonal loss in the corticospinal tracts, and the brainstem showed poorly pigmented neurons in the substantia nigra. There were increased levels of Mn and decreased amounts of SLC30A10 in various brain regions. Lechpammer et al. (2014) noted that this patient had the unusual feature of spastic paraparesis rather than extrapyramidal signs, which may have reflected the corticospinal tract pathology. The findings indicated that SLC30A10 mutations result in chronic, cumulative brain injury, and Lechpammer et al. (2014) suggested that early chelation therapy may prevent symptom progression. |Sahni et al. (2007) and Brna et al. (2011) reported a Canadian girl who presented at age 5 years with pica, emotional lability, decreased speech output, echolalia, and social withdrawal. Her motor coordination had deteriorated, and she had lost fine motor skills and was unable to walk independently. Neurologic examination shoed a narrow-based, high stepping gait, mild truncal ataxia, and action tremor. Brain MRI showed hyperintensities in the basal ganglia, and laboratory studies showed increased serum manganese, low iron, and polycythemia. Liver biopsy was normal, but showed increased manganese. Results of extensive environmental studies did not explain the toxicity, suggesting a metabolic disorder. Chelation therapy resulted in some neurologic improvement, as well as improvement of brain lesions. At age 10 years, she had a stable neurologic status and was able to walk short distances, but preferred using a wheelchair. Cognition was unimpaired and she functioned at an appropriate level in school. |Tuschl et al. (2012) reported 15 individuals from 8 families with HMDPC, including 4 patients from 3 families previously reported by Gospe et al. (2000), Tuschl et al. (2008), Sahni et al. (2007), and Brna et al. (2011). The patients presented between 2 and 15 years of age with gait disturbances and hypertonia, with some becoming wheelchair-bound. Most had a pure 4-limb dystonia, with a high stepping gait and fine motor impairment, sometimes with dysarthria, fine tremor, and bradykinesia; 1 had pure spastic paraparesis without extrapyramidal features. Intellectual development was normal. All had pathognomonic MRI brain scans with hyperintensities of the globus pallidus, putamen, caudate, subthalamic and dentate nucleus and sparing of the thalamus and ventral pons on T1-weighted images. Those with more extensive disease showed white matter and anterior pituitary involvement. Most patients had liver impairment with raised transaminases and unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia; 2 died of cirrhosis. Other features included polycythemia associated with high erythropoietin levels, decreased iron stores, and increased total iron binding capacity. Liver tissue and blood showed significantly increased Mn content, and parental blood Mn levels were mildly increased in 3 families, consistent with a carrier status. Chelation therapy in some patients resulted in improvement of the neurologic symptoms. |Quadri et al. (2012) reported 2 consanguineous families, of Italian and Dutch descent, respectively, in which a total of 5 patients had hypermanganesemia associated with degenerative motor symptoms. The patients were adults at the time of the report, ranging in age from 46 to 65 years. In the Italian family, 2 brothers presented at age 47 and 57 years, respectively, with parkinsonism, including gait disturbances, bradykinesia, hypomimia, rigidity, and postural instability. Both also had polycythemia, hepatomegaly, and brain MRI lesions in the basal ganglia, midbrain, thalamus, cerebellum, and corticospinal tract. One patient had a sensorimotor axonal polyneuropathy. Laboratory studies showed markedly increased manganese, increased transferrin, and decreased ferritin. Chelation therapy resulted in clinical improvement. There were 3 affected sibs in the Dutch family. All developed polycythemia in early childhood. Neurologic symptoms appeared at ages 2, 14, and 10 years, respectively, but the features were variable between patients. The oldest brother developed walking difficulties and limb spasms at age 14. This progressed and he developed generalized dystonia and became wheelchair-bound. Brain MRI showed no gross abnormalities. His younger brother developed walking difficulties at age 2 years. He had progressive dystonia and was wheelchair-bound at age 34. Both had increased serum manganese and increased total iron binding capacity, but normal iron. Brain MRI of the older brother was normal, but that of the younger brother showed hyperintense lesions of the globus pallidus. Neither had liver involvement. However, their younger sister died at age 46 of liver cirrhosis, portal hypertension, splenomegaly, and hepatic encephalopathy. She developed gait difficulties at the age of about 10, but there was no clear documentation of dystonia. Manganese levels were never determined, and neuroimaging was never performed. |
617013::hypermanganesemia with dystonia-2 (HMNDYT2) is caused by homozygous mutation in the SLC39A14 gene (608736) on chromosome 8p21.|Hypermanganesemia with dystonia-2 is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized predominantly by loss of motor milestones in the first years of life. Affected individuals then develop rapidly progressive abnormal movements, including dystonia, spasticity, bulbar dysfunction, and variable features of parkinsonism, causing loss of ambulation. Cognition may be impaired, but is better preserved than motor function. The disorder results from abnormal accumulation of manganese (Mn), which is toxic to neurons. Chelation therapy, if started early, may provide clinical benefit (summary by Tuschl et al., 2016). For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of HMNDYT, see HMNDYT1 (613280).|Tuschl et al. (2016) reported 9 children from 5 unrelated consanguineous families with a severe neurodegenerative disorder with loss of developmental milestones and progressive dystonia appearing between 6 months and 3 years of age. By the end of the first decade, they had generalized pharmacoresistant dystonia, limb contractures and scoliosis, and loss of independent ambulation. More variable neurologic features included spasticity, oromandibular or bulbar dysfunction, axial hypotonia, and parkinsonism, with hypomimia, tremor, and bradykinesia. Cognition was highly variable: 2 sibs had intellectual disability, were nonverbal, and were unable to follow commands; 3 sibs from another family had learning disabilities only; 1 only child was cognitively normal; another only child did not achieve language; and 2 sibs from another family were not noted to have cognitive defects but were lost to follow-up. Brain MRI showed Mn deposition in the deep gray matter, including the globus pallidus and, to a lesser extent, the striatum, with sparing of the thalamus. There was also extensive white matter involvement including the cerebellum, spinal cord, and dorsal pons. Some patients had evidence of cerebral and cerebellar atrophy. Whole blood levels of Mn were markedly increased compared to controls, whereas iron, zinc, and cadmium levels, assessed in 2 patients, were normal. None of the patients developed polycythemia or liver disease, and liver imaging of 1 patient was normal. Three patients died at ages 13 months, 4 years, and 8 years. Postmortem examination of the patient who died at age 4 years showed neuronal loss in the globus pallidus, with relative preservation of neurons in the cortex, caudate, putamen, and thalamus. |
613752::hypermethioninemia with deficiency of S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase can be caused by compound heterozygous mutation in the AHCY gene (180960) on chromosome 20q11.|In 3 daughters of Tunisian parents who were not known to be related but came from the same village in Tunisia, Labrune et al. (1990) described hypermethioninemia associated with failure to thrive, mental and motor retardation, facial dysmorphism with abnormal hair and teeth, and myocardiopathy. Hepatic S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase activity was decreased by 80% in the 3 children. Neonatal cholestasis was also a feature. A fourth daughter, who died of hepatic failure at the age of 9 months, was probably also affected. The disorder was presumably autosomal recessive. |Baric et al. (2004) reported a Croatian boy with hypermethioninemia and deficiency of S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase. The patient's psychomotor development was slow until his fifth month when stagnation and regression were noted. The main problems were hypotonia, sluggishness, lack of interest, and very poor head control. Electron microscopy of muscle showed numerous abnormal myelin figures; liver biopsy showed mild hepatitis with sparse rough endoplasmic reticulum. At age 12 months, brain MRI showed white matter atrophy and abnormally slow myelination. Hypermethioninemia was present in the initial metabolic study at age 8 months, and persisted without tyrosine elevation. Plasma total homocysteine was slightly elevated; in plasma, S-adenosylmethionine was 30-fold and S-adenosylhomocysteine 150-fold elevated. Activity of S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase was approximately 3% of control values in liver and was 5 to 10% of control values in red blood cells and cultured fibroblasts. Leukocyte DNA was hypermethylated. |Other causes of hypermethioninemia include hereditary tyrosinemia (276700), cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency (236200), and methionine adenosyltransferase deficiency (250850).|
258870::gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the OAT gene (613349) on chromosome 10q26.|Gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina due to deficiency of ornithine aminotransferase is clinically characterized by a triad of progressive chorioretinal degeneration, early cataract formation, and type II muscle fiber atrophy. Characteristic chorioretinal atrophy with progressive constriction of the visual fields leads to blindness at the latest during the sixth decade of life. Patients generally have normal intelligence (summary by Peltola et al., 2002).See 238970 for another hyperornithinemia syndrome. |Hyperornithinemia presumably due to deficiency of ornithine ketoacid aminotransferase was found in 9 patients with gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina (Simell and Takki, 1973). The clinical history of gyrate atrophy is usually night blindness that begins in late childhood, accompanied by sharply demarcated circular areas of chorioretinal atrophy. During the second and third decades the areas of atrophy enlarge. Ornithine levels were 10 to 20 times higher than normal in plasma, urine, spinal fluid, and aqueous humor. No consistent clinical abnormality other than the ocular one was found. Hyperammonemia was not found in the fasting state or after meals or stress testing. All the patients' parents were from the same geographic area of Finland. |Most patients with gyrate atrophy have posterior subcapsular cataracts by the end of the second decade (Kaiser-Kupfer et al., 1983). |Sipila et al. (1979) studied 21 patients with gyrate atrophy with hyperornithinemia and found that type II muscle fibers were almost universally atrophic and had tubular aggregates. Despite the changes in type II fibers, the patients usually had no muscle symptoms, although some showed impaired performance when speed or acute strength was required. The disease progresses to almost complete loss of type II fibers, but the progression of muscle changes is slower than that of ocular pathology. Valtonen et al. (1996) found type II muscle fiber atrophy in all 7 patients with gyrate atrophy studied by muscle biopsy and found tubular aggregates in 6 of the 7 patients. CT and MRI studies showed changes in the thigh muscles in all patients. |It has been suggested that changes in skeletal muscle, as well as the ocular changes, may be mediated by hyperornithinemia-induced deficiency of high-energy creatine phosphate. Abnormal brain MRI and EEG studies are found in another disorder of creatine metabolism, guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency (612736); for this reason, Valtonen et al. (1999) investigated CNS involvement in gyrate atrophy, which seems to be associated with a milder degree of phosphocreatine deficiency. They compared 23 untreated gyrate atrophy patients with age-matched healthy controls, and with 9 patients who had received creatine or creatine precursor supplementation daily for several years. The MRI or EEG findings of the patients on creatine supplementation did not differ from those of the untreated group. Brain MRI revealed degenerative lesions in the white matter in 50% of the gyrate atrophy patients, and 70% of the patients had premature atrophic changes, with a striking increase in the number of Virchow spaces. Of the patients whose EEG was recorded, 58% had abnormal slow background activity, focal lesions, or high-amplitude beta rhythm. The EEG findings were not associated with the MRI changes or with the age or sex of the patients. Valtonen et al. (1999) concluded that early degenerative and atrophic brain changes and abnormal EEG are features of gyrate atrophy, in addition to the well-characterized eye and muscle manifestations. |Stoppoloni et al. (1978) reported a patient with gyrate atrophy at age 3 years and 9 months who also had mild mental retardation, delayed language development, and speech defects. |Valle et al. (1977) demonstrated deficiency of ornithine-delta-aminotransferase, a pyridoxal-dependent enzyme, in transformed lymphocytes. |Some cases of OAT deficiency are B6-responsive. Wirtz et al. (1985) found no complementation when fibroblasts from four B6-responsive and three B6-nonresponsive patients were fused. This suggests that the 2 forms are allelic. B6-responsive patients had higher activity of OAT in cell homogenates and greater incorporation of radioactivity from (14)C-ornithine into protein in cultured cells in situ than did B6-unresponsive patients. |Shih et al. (1988) studied fibroblasts from heterozygotes for the pyridoxine-responsive variant and from heterozygotes for the pyridoxine-nonresponsive variant. Both contain intermediate levels of OAT activity. The 2 variants could be distinguished, however, by the in vitro responsiveness of OAT activity to pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) stimulation. The ratios of OAT with no PLP added were lowest for controls, intermediate for pyridoxine-nonresponsive heterozygotes, and highest for pyridoxine-responsive heterozygotes. Kennaway et al. (1989) studied the mutant enzyme in 9 patients with gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina by use of a radiochemical assay to measure the Km for PLP in fibroblast mitochondria and the heat stability of OAT at 45 degrees in the presence and absence of PLP. The apparent Km for PLP was lower in nonresponsive patients than in patients responsive to pyridoxine. In 7 patients studied, the apparent Km for ornithine was normal. The patient with the mildest clinical disease, responsive to pyridoxine, had the most stable enzyme, but also the highest Km for PLP. OAT protein was clearly detectable by Western blot analysis of mitochondrial proteins in the pyridoxine-responsive patients and in 2 of 5 nonresponders, but was low or undetectable in the 3 other patients. |
238970::the hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome is caused by homozygous mutation in the SLC25A15 gene (603861), which encodes the mitochondrial ornithine transporter, on chromosome 13q14.|Shih et al. (1969) reported a child with mental retardation and myoclonic seizures associated with hyperornithinemia, hyperammonemia, and homocitrullinemia. The findings were consistent with an inherited disorder of amino acid metabolism. |Rodes et al. (1987) reported a family in which 2 brothers and a sister were affected with HHH syndrome. One patient had progressive spastic paraparesis. At least 2 of the individuals voluntarily avoided a high protein diet. |Dionisi Vici et al. (1987) found reports of 23 patients with HHH syndrome in the literature, only 1 of whom showed symptoms as a neonate. |Koike et al. (1987) reported Japanese brothers, aged 13 and 19 years, with HHH syndrome. The clinical picture included protein intolerance, mental retardation, seizures, and stuporous episodes. One patient had cerebellar ataxia, myoclonus, convulsive seizure, and muscular weakness in both legs. The older brother had refused to eat fish and meat, and had episodes of vomiting when fed a high-protein formula. Both brothers also had myoclonus epilepsy. |Nakajima et al. (1988) reported a Japanese child, born of healthy first-cousin parents, with HHH syndrome. Development was delayed in late infancy, and spastic paraplegia was noted at the age of 3 years. The patient always avoided the intake of meat, milk, and eggs. At age 10, he had an episode of lethargy and hyperammonemia. Brain CT showed diffuse white matter low density and atrophy of the cerebellar vermis. |Tuchman et al. (1990) described this disorder in a 39-year-old man and his 42-year-old sister, both vegetarians, who had had episodic confusion for many years, but normal mental function between these episodes. Hyperammonemia was documented during an episode of confusion in the male sib but not in his sister. During therapy with citrulline and phenylbutyrate sodium, plasma ornithine levels increased in both patients, while plasma levels of glutamine and alanine decreased to normal. With therapy, their clinical conditions improved and no recurrent neurologic dysfunction was observed over a follow-up period of 20 months. |Miyamoto et al. (2001) reported a 52-year-old woman who had spastic gait and cerebellar signs, including dysmetria, dysdiadochokinesis, and scanning speech, since adolescence, but did not have mental retardation. She had spastic paraparesis of the arms since age 27. Hyperammonemia was noted at the age of 36 years, and a protein-restricted diet and kanamycin were prescribed. At age 37, she had surgery to elongate Achilles tendons in both legs. The diagnosis of HHH syndrome was made at the age of 52, on the basis of hyperornithinemia and homocitrullinuria. |Salvi et al. (2001) reported a follow-up on 8 Italian patients who had been diagnosed with HHH syndrome. Age at onset ranged from infancy to 18 years. The predominant neurologic finding was spastic paraparesis, seen in 5 patients. The remaining 3 patients showed signs of pyramidal dysfunction, which the authors suggested may progress to spastic paraparesis later in life. Mental retardation and clonic movements were variably present. |Debray et al. (2008) reviewed the medical records of 16 French Canadian patients with HHH syndrome, 15 of whom were homozygous for the common F188del founder mutation in the SLC25A15 gene (603861.0001). Six of the patients had previously been reported by Lemay et al. (1992). The median age at presentation was 2.7 years (range, 3 months to 16 years). Common features included failure to thrive, developmental delay, liver dysfunction with secondary coagulation defects, hyperammonemia, hyperornithinemia, and abnormally increased liver enzymes. |Batshaw et al. (2014) reported the results of an analysis of 614 patients with urea cycle disorders (UCDs) enrolled in the Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium's longitudinal study protocol. HHH syndrome occurred in 9 patients (1.5%), 8 of whom had a late-onset form. |
239000::Paget disease of bone-5 (PDB5), also known as juvenile Paget disease, results from osteoprotegerin deficiency caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the TNFRSF11B gene (602643) on chromosome 8q24.|Paget disease of bone-5 is an autosomal recessive, juvenile-onset form of Paget disease, a disorder of the skeleton resulting from abnormal bone resorption and formation. Clinical manifestations include short stature, progressive long bone deformities, fractures, vertebral collapse, skull enlargement, and hyperostosis with progressive deafness. There is phenotypic variability, with some patients presenting in infancy, while others present later in childhood (summary by Naot et al., 2014). |For discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Paget disease of bone, see 167250.|Bakwin and Eiger (1956) and Bakwin et al. (1964) described a familial disorder manifesting itself from early in life by large head and expanded and bowed extremities. Alkaline phosphatase was elevated. The long bones are greatly expanded with osteoporosis and coarse trabeculations. The calvaria is markedly thickened with islands of increased bone density. Muscular weakness may be striking. In Bakwin's family, 2 sisters, of Puerto Rican parentage, were severely affected. Both had retinal degeneration. In one, the changes included angioid streaks. The parents were first cousins and the mother was mildly affected. The findings in her would probably have escaped detection if x-rays had not been made. The authors thought this to be the same as the condition described in 2 sisters by Swoboda (1958) as hyperostosis corticalis deformans juvenilis and by Choremis et al. (1958) as Paget disease in an 11-year-old boy. Caffey (1961) and Rubin (1964) presented cases. |Fanconi et al. (1964) described the x-ray and histologic changes in a young Brazilian male and suggested the designation osteochalasia desmalis familiaris. The condition called familial osteoectasia by Stemmermann (1966) appears to be the same. His cases were in brother and sister, aged 2 and 3, of Puerto Rican ancestry. |Brother and sister of mixed Hawaiian, Filipino, and Puerto Rican ancestry were described by Eyring and Eisenberg (1968). Fragile bones, premature loss of teeth, and dwarfism were features. Increased bone formation and destruction were thought to be present. Both acid and alkaline phosphatases and leucine aminopeptidase were elevated. Increased hydroxyproline in blood and urine and hyperuricemia were also demonstrated. Thompson et al. (1969) and Smith (1976) reported further on the brother and sister described by Eyring and Eisenberg (1968). Singer et al. (1994) provided a 20-year follow-up of the same family. Of 8 sibs, 3 were affected. One brother, at the age of 36, had roentgenographic signs only. The second affected brother suffered from recurrent renal colic from calcium-containing stones. The affected sister had died at the age of 30 from pneumonia and respiratory failure. |Caffey (1973) reviewed the findings in 14 patients distributed in 10 families.|Golob et al. (1996) investigated extensively a mentally retarded 21-year-old woman with unusually mild juvenile Paget disease. Progressive bowing deformity of her lower limbs began at age 1.5 years. Nontraumatic fractures of both femurs and both tibias occurred between ages 9 and 14 years. During adulthood, cortical thickening, osteosclerosis, and bowing affected these bones. Serum alkaline phosphatase activity was persistently elevated. They found that her serum osteocalcin (112260) and urinary hydroxyproline and pyridinoline:deoxypyridinoline activities were also increased. The skeletal histopathology was considered to be quite different from that of classic Paget bone disease. Electron microscopy revealed no cytoplasmic or nuclear inclusions. Whyte et al. (1996) found that the patient's circulating monocytes were free of viral transcripts that have been associated with classic Paget bone disease. |Naot et al. (2014) reported 2 unrelated patients with PDB5. A 3.5-year-old boy, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, had a severe phenotype, with delayed development, short stature, brachycephaly, bowing of the limbs, and severe sensorineural hearing loss with inability to speak. Laboratory studies showed increased alkaline phosphatase. Pamidronate treatment resulted in decreased pain. The second patient was less severely affected. He presented with frequent fractures in infancy and delayed motor development. At age 19, he needed a wheelchair to walk long distances, had barrel chest, long bone deformities, kyphosis, short stature, and hearing loss. Radiographs showed skull expansion of the diploic space with mottled mineralization, ankylosis of the vertebral bodies and sacroiliac joints, shortening of the humeri with thickened cortices, and areas of sclerosis and demineralization in the temporal bones. He also had angioid streaks and macular scarring in the retina. Laboratory studies showed increased alkaline phosphatase and low vitamin D.|
239500::hyperprolinemia type I (HYRPRO1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the proline dehydrogenase gene (PRODH; 606810) on chromosome 22q11.|The PRODH gene falls within the region deleted in the 22q11 deletion syndrome, including DiGeorge syndrome (188400) and velocardiofacial syndrome (192430).|Phang et al. (2001) noted that prospective studies of HPI probands identified through newborn screening as well as reports of several families have suggested that it is a metabolic disorder not clearly associated with clinical manifestations. Phang et al. (2001) concluded that HPI is a relatively benign condition in most individuals under most circumstances. However, other reports have suggested that some patients have a severe phenotype with neurologic manifestations, including epilepsy and mental retardation (Jacquet et al., 2003). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Hyperprolinemia|See also hyperprolinemia type II (HYRPRO2; 239510), which is caused by mutation in the gene encoding pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase (P5CDH, ALDH4A1; 606811) on chromosome 1p36.|Scriver et al. (1961) and Schafer et al. (1962) described a Scottish-Irish family in which the male proband and 3 sibs had elevated plasma and urinary proline. There was also increased urinary hydroxyproline and glycine, presumably because these 3 amino acids share a renal tubular active transport mechanism that may be overloaded by the high level of proline in the glomerular filtrate (see iminoglycinuria, 242600). Other genetic disorders in this family included hereditary nephropathy, deafness, and photogenic epilepsy, which segregated in a different pattern and were presumably unrelated to the hyperprolinemia. |Efron (1965) reported an Italian family with hyperprolinemia; the enzyme defect was found to be in proline oxidase. |Perry et al. (1968) reported type I hyperprolinemia in 2 generations of a consanguineous American Indian family. Hereditary renal abnormalities occurred in members of 3 generations. The proband later developed Wilms tumor. Perry et al. (1968) observed that marked elevations of plasma proline occur in homozygotes and normal or moderately elevated levels in heterozygotes. Goyer et al. (1968) observed hereditary nephritis, neurosensory hearing loss, prolinuria, and ichthyosis in various combinations in 23 members of a kindred. |Ishikawa et al. (1991) reported a 9-year-old Japanese girl with type I hyperprolinemia who also had photogenic epilepsy. EEG showed epileptic discharges and she demonstrated regression in speech and motor activities from 7 years of age. Her plasma proline levels were 3 to 4 times higher than control levels. Proline oxidase activity of the liver biopsy tissues was about 23.5% of normal controls. She showed progressive speech and motor deterioration in spite of the restriction of proline and protein intake. |Humbertclaude et al. (2001) reported a patient with hyperprolinemia type I who had a severe neurologic disorder including psychomotor delay, right hemiparesis, and epilepsy. There were increased levels of proline in the serum, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid. Fluorescence in situ hybridization excluded a chromosome 22q11 deletion. Treatment with vigabatrin for the seizures appeared to aggravate the condition and was discontinued. In the following months, the patient had marked psychomotor improvement, without modification of the epilepsy. |Jacquet et al. (2003) reported a 4-year-old boy, born of consanguineous parents of Egyptian origin, who was referred for severe psychomotor delay, hyperactivity, sleep disturbance with bruxism, and status epilepticus. Metabolic screening showed a very high level of proline in plasma, urine, and CSF. Genetic analysis identified a homozygous 350-kb deletion on chromosome 22q11, including the entire PRODH gene as well as some neighboring loci. The findings clearly indicated that a severe form of type I hyperprolinemia with neurologic deficits can be caused by inactivation of the PRODH gene. |Afenjar et al. (2007) reported 4 unrelated patients with HPI and a severe neurologic phenotype. Common features included psychomotor delay from birth, often associated with hypotonia, severe language delay, autistic features, behavioral problems, and seizures. One patient who was heterozygous for a 22q11 microdeletion also had dysmorphic features. Four previously reported patients with HPI and neurologic involvement had a similar phenotype. Afenjar et al. (2007) concluded that HPI may not always be a benign condition, and that the severity of the clinical phenotype appears to correlate with the serum proline level. |Di Rosa et al. (2008) reported 4 unrelated Italian children with HPI and neurologic manifestations, including epilepsy and mental retardation. Clinical features included early motor and cognitive developmental delay, speech delay, autistic features, hyperactivity, stereotypic behaviors, and seizures. All patients had increased plasma and urine proline levels. All patients had biallelic mutations in the PRODH gene, often with several variants on the same allele. Residual enzyme activity ranged from null in the most severely affected patient to 25 to 30% in those with a relatively milder phenotype. Di Rosa et al. (2008) postulated that hyperprolinemia type I may be associated with neuropsychiatric disorders, which may ultimately correlate with PRODH genotype.|
239510::hyperprolinemia type II (HYRPRO2) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the pyrroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase gene (P5CDH; 606811) on chromosome 1p36.For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of hyperprolinemia, see HYRPRO1 (239500).|Emery et al. (1968) described an affected mentally retarded 18-year-old girl whose retarded sister had died, presumably of the same disorder. Selkoe (1969) described a second type of hyperprolinemia with only mild mental retardation and without renal disease. Pavone et al. (1975) described 3 clinically normal sibs with type II hyperprolinemia. They lived in eastern Sicily and had first-cousin parents. All 3 also showed hyperglycinemia. The association is unexplained. No relation between proline and glycine metabolism is evident. Valle et al. (1979) found that both proline oxidase and hydroxyproline oxidase are deficient in hyperprolinemia type II. |
277100::Urinary and serum valine were elevated, without elevation of leucine and isoleucine, in a child with vomiting, failure to thrive, and drowsiness (Wada et al., 1963). The parents, who were not known to be related, showed abnormally large amounts of valine in the urine. The deficient enzyme is valine transaminase. Observation of this condition and sweaty feet disease indicates that different enzymes are involved in the metabolism of valine, leucine, and isoleucine. Dancis et al. (1967) presented evidence that the transamination of valine is dependent on an enzyme specific for valine. They showed further that transamination of valine is demonstrable in the normal placenta. It might be possible to make a prenatal diagnosis of valinemia by needle biopsy of the placenta, in instances of an affected previously born sib. |
194470::Albumin (103600) is the major transport protein in blood for zinc. On the basis of a detailed comparison of the 18 x-ray crystal structures of human albumin available in a protein database, together with competitive zinc/cadmium-binding studies using cadmium NMR, mutagenesis, and molecular modeling, Stewart et al. (2003) proposed a model for the high-affinity Zn(2+) site and a mechanism for fatty acid-induced switching of its ligand environment. |In 2 generations of a family with male-to-male transmission, Smith et al. (1976) found elevated plasma zinc due apparently to increased binding to albumin. No ill effects were noted. |Failla et al. (1982) showed that albumin is not increased in these cases but that excess zinc is bound to albumin. They did not identify the molecular change in albumin responsible for the increased binding. (Copper and iron were not increased.) |Familial hyperzincemia may be a 'nondisease' caused by abnormal binding by a mutant albumin, comparable to familial dysalbuminemic hyperthyroxinemia.|Hambidge et al. (1985) observed very high plasma zinc in an 18-year-old Pakistani man with recurrent arthritis and pyoderma gangrenosa from an early age. The authors thought the genetic form of hyperzincemia was excluded by normal values in all close relatives. He could, of course, be the victim of a new mutation. Alternatively, there may have been unknown dosing with zinc. |Sampson et al. (1997) reported a patient with very high concentrations of zinc in plasma but with clinical features of zinc deficiency. Biochemical analysis showed that the patient had high concentrations of an unidentified zinc-binding protein which was subsequently identified by Richmond et al. (1999) as calprotectin, a complex of S100A8 (123885) and S100A9 (123886). |Sampson et al. (2002) reported 5 patients with hyperzincemia in whom hypercalprotectinemia was also present: an 18-year-old male (previously reported by Sampson et al., 1997), a 9-year-old girl and a 14-year-old boy with similar clinical features, the 35-year-old mother of the 18 year old (previously reported by Saito et al. (2002)), and a 21-year-old man with a milder phenotype than the other patients. All patients presented with recurrent infections, hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, and evidence of systemic inflammation. Three had cutaneous inflammation and 3 presented in infancy with severe growth failure. Size exclusion chromatography showed that zinc and calprotectin were associated in a broad fraction with a molecular mass range of 100 to 300 kD. Analysis by electrophoresis and mass spectrometry showed that the calprotectin in the patients' protein, although raised in quantity, contained normal S100A8 and S100A9 subunits. |
615558::familial hypobetalipoproteinemia-1 (FBHL1) is caused by mutation in the APOB gene (107730) on chromosome 2p24.See abetalipoproteinemia (ABL; 200100) for a similar disorder caused by mutation in the MTP gene (157147).|Hypobetalipoproteinemia (FBHL) and abetalipoproteinemia (ABL; 200100) are rare diseases characterized by hypocholesterolemia and malabsorption of lipid-soluble vitamins leading to retinal degeneration, neuropathy, and coagulopathy. Hepatic steatosis is also common. The root cause of both disorders is improper packaging and secretion of apolipoprotein B-containing particles. Obligate heterozygous parents of FBHL patients typically have half normal levels of apoB-containing lipoproteins consistent with autosomal codominant inheritance, whereas obligate heterozygous parents of ABL patients usually have normal lipids consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance (summary by Lee and Hegele, 2014).Familial hypobetalipoproteinemia-2 (FHBL2; 605019) is caused by mutation in the ANGPTL3 gene (604774) on chromosome 1p31.|Brown et al. (1974) noted that the consistent laboratory findings of reduced serum cholesterol and beta-lipoprotein define hypobetalipoproteinemia as a distinct syndrome. They found 4 reported kindreds and added a fifth. Only 2 of the patients in the reported families had symptoms. Mars et al. (1969) observed a family in which 1 of the 14 hypobetalipoproteinemic persons (in 3 generations), a 37-year-old woman, had signs and symptoms of progressive demyelination of the central nervous system, lack of responsiveness to local anesthesia, and dislike for animal fats and milk. The family reported by Brown et al. (1974) contained a child with psychomotor retardation. Although the peripheral blood smear showed no acanthocytes, the red cells on symptomatic and asymptomatic persons became acanthocytotic when placed in tissue culture medium with 10% autologous serum.|Biemer and McCammon (1975) described a family and reviewed others in the literature in which a person with 'homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia' had occurred. They pointed out that although some of these cases were milder than cases of abetalipoproteinemia (ABL; 200100), homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia could often be distinguished from abetalipoproteinemia only by the demonstration of presumably heterozygous hypobetalipoproteinemic first-degree relatives of the homozygote. |Kahn and Glueck (1978) reported remarkable freedom from atheroma in a 76-year-old woman who died from hepatic failure due apparently to hemochromatosis. The woman had been found to have hypobetalipoproteinemia in a study done previously (Glueck et al., 1976). This and hyperalphalipoproteinemia (143470) are accompanied by increased life expectancy. |Steinberg et al. (1979) described a kindred with a form of hypobetalipoproteinemia characterized by unusually low LDL cholesterol, normal triglyceride levels, low levels of HDL, mild fat malabsorption, and a defect in chylomicron clearance. On a high-carbohydrate diet, the triglyceride levels of the 67-year-old proband fell rather than rose. The proband, a retired Naval chaplain, was asymptomatic. He came to attention because of total serum cholesterol of 47 mg/dl. The proband's mother, aged 92, 1 brother, 1 sister, and 2 daughters also had hypobetalipoproteinemia. Young et al. (1987) found an abnormality of apoB, called apolipoprotein B37, in the plasma lipoproteins of multiple members of this kindred. Young et al. (1987) reported an intensive study of 41 members in 3 generations of this kindred. They documented the presence, in addition to the abnormal, truncated apoB species B37, of another apoB allele that was associated with reduced plasma concentrations of the normal apoB100. The proband (H.J.B.) and 2 of his sibs had both abnormal apoB alleles and were therefore compound heterozygotes for familial hypobetalipoproteinemia. All of the offspring of the 3 compound heterozygotes had hypobetalipoproteinemia, and each had evidence of only 1 of the abnormal apoB alleles. The average LDL cholesterol level in the compound heterozygotes was 6 mg/dl; in the 6 heterozygotes who had only the abnormal apoB37 allele, 31 mg/dl; in the 10 heterozygotes who had only the allele for reduced plasma concentrations of apoB100, 31 mg/dl; and in 22 unaffected family members, 110 mg/dl. |Malloy et al. (1981) described a patient with a metabolic disorder that they termed 'normotriglyceridemia abetalipoproteinemia.' The disorder was characterized by the absence of LDLs and apoB100 in plasma with apparently normal secretion of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins containing apoB48. Homer et al. (2005) suggested that the term 'normotriglyceridemic hypobetalipoproteinemia' is preferred to 'normotriglyceridemic abetalipoproteinemia' because abetalipoproteinemia (ABL; 200100) refers to the disorder caused by mutation in the MTP gene (157147). |Berger et al. (1983) studied a kindred in which the proband manifested the clinical and biochemical features of the homozygous state. Unlike the apparent absence of apolipoprotein B in the plasma in 5 previous cases of homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia, they found a minute amount of apoB (about 0.025% of normal) in the plasma and suggested that the disorder might result not from a structural gene defect but from a failure of secretion. Since LDLs are a main source of cholesterol for steroid hormone formation, Parker et al. (1986) were interested in studying the endocrine changes during pregnancy in homozygous familial hypobetalipoproteinemia. They found it surprising that a woman with phenotypic abetalipoproteinemia, previously reported by Illingworth et al. (1979), could become 'pregnant, let alone carry the pregnancy to term without hormonal therapy.' They noted successful pregnancy in 3 other abetalipoproteinemic women. In 2 patients with homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia, Ross et al. (1988) found that Southern blot analysis with 10 different cDNA probes revealed a normal gene without major insertions, deletions, or rearrangements. Northern and slot-blot analyses of total liver mRNA showed a normal-sized apoB mRNA that was present in greatly reduced quantities. ApoB protein was detected in liver cells immunohistochemically but was markedly reduced in quantity, and no apoB was detectable in the plasma with an ELISA assay. Ross et al. (1988) interpreted the findings as indicating a mutation in the coding portion of the apoB gene, leading to an abnormal apoB protein and apoB mRNA instability. These findings were distinct from those previously noted in abetalipoproteinemia (200100), which is characterized by an elevated level of hepatic apoB mRNA and accumulation of intracellular hepatic apoB protein. The blood-lipid changes that accompany heterozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia are reduced plasma concentrations of LDL cholesterol, total triglycerides, and APOB to less than 50% of normal values. |Harano et al. (1989) identified homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia in 3 sibs. Both parents and 2 children of 1 of the sibs were heterozygous. The 75-year-old proband, the father of the 3 sibs, died of fever of unknown cause, thrombocytopenia, and anemia. He had ataxic movements of the hands and gait disturbance in later life. The 3 homozygotes showed marked deficiency of apoB100, although trace amounts were noted in LDL. In contrast, apoB48 was present in chylomicrons obtained after a fatty meal in 2 of the patients with homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia, indicating a selective deficiency of apoB100. |Keidar et al. (1990) described apparent compound heterozygosity for abetalipoproteinemia and familial hypobetalipoproteinemia. The proband, a 10-year-old boy with abetalipoproteinemia, had a father with a normal apolipoprotein profile; however, his mother and maternal grandfather suffered from familial hypobetalipoproteinemia. |Araki et al. (1991) described a 55-year-old man with cerebellar ataxia due apparently to hypobetalipoproteinemia. A brother also had hypobetalipoproteinemia with neurologic symptoms. The 2 children of the proband, aged 31 and 29 years, and a sister of the proband had only hypobetalipoproteinemia. The proband and his neurologically affected brother as well as members of the 2 previous generations had steatocystoma multiplex (184500). The latter condition may have been coincidental. |Di Leo et al. (2008) reported 3 patients with severe hypobetalipoproteinemia due to homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for mutations in APOB, who presented with chronic liver disease and/or chronic diarrhea at ages 52, 55, and 19 years, respectively. The authors stated that the clinical diagnosis of homozygous FHBL is extremely rare, with approximately 20 cases reported over the past 2 decades; they noted that their patients highlight the heterogeneity of clinical manifestations and the possible presentation of disease late in life. |
240800::leucine-sensitive hypoglycemia of infancy (LIH) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the SUR1 gene (ABCC8; 600509).|Cochrane et al. (1956) and DiGeorge and Auerbach (1960) reported familial infantile hypoglycemia precipitated by leucine. The family reported by Cochrane et al. (1956) included a father and 2 daughters who developed hypoglycemia after high protein feedings. Hypoglycemia was also elicited by administration of oral or intravenous infusions of leucine. |Ebbin et al. (1967) observed symptomatic hypoglycemia with leucine sensitivity in a mother and daughter. Other cases of adults with leucine sensitivity have had islet adenomas, which apparently were not present in this case.|Mabry et al. (1960) reported a Caucasian boy who presented with hypoglycemic seizures in early infancy and was shown to be susceptible to hypoglycemia when given an intravenous infusion of leucine. His father experienced faintness and dizziness after administration of oral leucine, with a blood sugar level that fell from 100 to 60 mg%; he refused further testing. The proband had 2 brothers who were reported to be healthy. Mabry et al. (1960) also studied an African American girl who had leucine-induced hypoglycemia. Her parents were unavailable for study. In addition, the authors tested another 7 children with hypoglycemia of undetermined etiology, but leucine had no effect on their blood sugar levels. |
146110::hypogonadotropic hypogonadism-7 with or without anosmia (HH7) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the GNRHR gene (138850) on chromosome 4q13, sometimes in association with mutation in another gene, e.g., FGFR1 (136350).|Congenital idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) is a disorder characterized by absent or incomplete sexual maturation by the age of 18 years, in conjunction with low levels of circulating gonadotropins and testosterone and no other abnormalities of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. Idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism can be caused by an isolated defect in gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GNRH; 152760) release, action, or both. Other associated nonreproductive phenotypes, such as anosmia, cleft palate, and sensorineural hearing loss, occur with variable frequency. In the presence of anosmia, idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism has been called 'Kallmann syndrome (KS),' whereas in the presence of a normal sense of smell, it has been termed 'normosmic idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (nIHH)' (summary by Raivio et al., 2007). Because families have been found to segregate both KS and nIHH, the disorder is here referred to as 'hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with or without anosmia (HH).' |For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with or without anosmia, see 147950.|De Roux et al. (1997) studied a brother and sister with normosmic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The 22-year-old propositus was referred because of hypogonadism and impaired libido, who had undergone puberty at age 16. His height was 180 cm and his arm span 186 cm. Physical examination revealed absence of facial hair, sparse pubic hair (Tanner stage 3), and a penis of 6 cm. He had scrotal testes, and the volume of each was 8 ml (normal, 15 to 25 ml). There was no gynecomastia. He had a normal sense of smell and no mirror movements of the upper limbs, no abnormal eye movements, no colorblindness, and no renal or craniofacial abnormalities. The karyotype was 46,XY. The patient's 37-year-old sister had a history of primary amenorrhea and infertility. Spontaneous thelarche had occurred at age 14 years. She had a single episode of uterine bleeding at age 18, and afterward received combined oral contraceptive treatment. This treatment was interrupted when she desired children. However, amenorrhea and absence of pregnancy led to ovulation-inducing treatment, which resulted in 2 normal pregnancies and the births of a girl and a boy, 4 and 7 years old at the time of report. After each pregnancy, she had persistent amenorrhea, and oral contraceptive treatment was resumed. Her height was 165 cm. Pubic hair development was at Tanner stage 5, and her breasts and external genitalia were those of a normal woman. Both parents and a sister were clinically and endocrinologically normal. |Caron et al. (1999) studied 3 sibs with mutations in GNRHR from a kindred with isolated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The 2 brothers, who were referred for lack of puberty, had microphallus and bilateral cryptorchidism; their sister had primary amenorrhea and a complete lack of puberty. The authors concluded that these hypogonadal patients were partially resistant to pulsatile GNRH administration, suggesting that they should instead be treated with gonadotropins to induce spermatogenesis or ovulation. |Pitteloud et al. (2001) reported a 26-year-old male with a mild form of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, which they called a 'fertile eunuch variant' of HH. The proband had hypogonadal testosterone levels, detectable but apulsatile gonadotropin secretion, and a normal adult male testicular size of 17 mL at baseline. After only 4 months of treatment with chorionic gonadotropin (CG; see 118860) alone, he developed sperm in his ejaculate, and his wife conceived. Following cessation of CG therapy, the patient demonstrated reversal of his hypogonadotropism as evidenced by normal adult male testosterone levels and the appearance of pulsatile luteinizing hormone (LH; see 152780) secretion. The authors concluded that this case expanded the clinical spectrum of GNRHR mutations, providing the first genetic basis for the fertile eunuch variant of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and documenting the occurrence of reversible hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in a patient with a GNRHR mutation. |De Roux et al. (1999) performed detailed endocrinologic studies in 3 affected members of a family with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism who had mutations in GNRHR (see MOLECULAR GENETICS). The proband, a 30-year-old male, had complete HH with extremely low plasma levels of gonadotropins, absence of pulsatility of endogenous LH and alpha subunit (see 152780), absence of response to GNRH (152760) and GNRH agonist (triptorelin), and absence of effect of pulsatile administration of GNRH. His affected 18- and 24-year-old sisters had only partial hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. They both had primary amenorrhea and normal breast development, but the younger sister had retarded bone maturation and uterus development. Gonadotropin concentrations were normal or low, but in both cases were restored to normal levels by a single injection of GNRH. In both sisters, there were no spontaneous pulses of LH, but pulsatile administration of GNRH provoked pulsatile secretion of LH in the younger one. The authors concluded that the same GNRHR mutations may exhibit varying degrees of alteration of gonadotropin function in affected members of the same family. |
602014::this form of hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia (HOMG1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the TRPM6 gene (607009) on chromosome 9q21.|Familial hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by very low serum magnesium levels. Hypocalcemia is a secondary consequence of parathyroid failure and parathyroid hormone resistance as a result of severe magnesium deficiency. The disease typically manifests during the first months of life with generalized convulsions or signs of increased neuromuscular excitability, such as muscle spasms or tetany. Untreated, the disease may be fatal or lead to severe neurologic damage. Treatment includes immediate administration of magnesium, usually intravenously, followed by life-long high-dose oral magnesium (review by Knoers, 2009). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Hypomagnesemia|A form of hypomagnesemia due to kidney defects and high urinary magnesium excretion associated with hypocalciuria (HOMG2; 154020) is caused by mutation in the FXYD2 gene (601814). Renal hypomagnesemia-3 (HOMG3; 248250), associated with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis, is caused by mutation in the CLDN16 gene (603959). Renal hypomagnesemia-4 (HOMG4; 611718), which is normocalciuric, is caused by mutation in the EGF gene (131530). Renal hypomagnesemia-5 (HOMG5; 248190), associated with hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and severe ocular involvement, is caused by mutation in the CLDN19 gene (610036). Renal hypomagnesemia-6 (HOMG6; 613882) is caused by mutation in the CNNM2 gene (607803).|Patients with Gitelman syndrome (263800) and Bartter syndrome (see 241200) also show hypomagnesemia, and steatorrhea and severe chronic diarrhea states, such as Crohn disease (see 226600) and Whipple disease, that can result in severe hypomagnesemia.|Vainsel et al. (1970) described a 5-month-old boy who had convulsions and persistent tetany, associated with hypomagnesemia and hypocalcemia. Vitamin D therapy corrected the hypocalcemia without improving the clinical status. Autopsy showed calcinosis of the myocardium, kidneys, and a cerebral artery. Two brothers of the proband had died of a clinically similar disorder and 3 of 4 surviving brothers had convulsions. Others, e.g., Skyberg et al. (1967, 1969), reported cases, all in males, and X-linked recessive inheritance was considered possible. |Teebi (1983) found reports of 10 cases, all male, including 2 brothers. |Walder et al. (1997) described 11 males and 2 females from 3 inbred Bedouin kindreds with familial hypomagnesemia. Most of the patients presented at 2 to 8 weeks of age with restlessness, tremor, neuromuscular hyperexcitability and overt seizures. None of the patients had feeding problems or signs of malabsorption. Serum magnesium levels at initial presentation ranged from 1.2 to 0.8 mg% (normal 1.4-2.6 mg%) and serum calcium levels of 2.7-7.6 mg% (normal 8.4-10.8 mg%). Treatment was delayed in 2 cases. These patients suffered prolonged, intractable seizures which were unresponsive to anticonvulsants. After treatment, these patients continued to suffer from a chronic convulsive disorder and mental retardation. Walder et al. (1997) noted that the predominance in males in their study was at least partially explained by a substantial predominance of male offspring (31) compared with female offspring (13) in these kindreds. Nonpenetrance was not observed in any of the unaffected females. Walder et al. (1997) stated that the low levels of serum magnesium in their patients were probably due to a defect in the intestinal reabsorption of magnesium. Renal magnesium secretion was normal. Normal values were observed for general intestinal absorption of other molecules. They commented that the hypocalcemia is to be expected since it develops in instances of any severe hypomagnesemic state, as a result of unresponsiveness to parathyroid hormone (168450). Restoration of serum magnesium levels to the low normal values with high doses, up to 20 times the normal daily requirement, can overcome the defect in absorption and restore serum calcium levels to normal. |In 2 sibs of consanguineous parents, Minty and Hall (1993) described the concurrence of acromesomelic dysplasia, Maroteaux type (AMDM; 602875) and familial hypomagnesemia. |
241410::hypoparathyroidism-retardation-dysmorphism syndrome (HRDS) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the TBCE gene (604934) on chromosome 1q42.|Biallelic mutation in the TBCE gene can also cause Kenny-Caffey syndrome (KCS1; 244460) and progressive encephalopathy with amyotrophy and optic atrophy (PEAMO; 617207).|HRDS is an autosomal recessive multisystem disorder characterized by intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation, infantile-onset hypoparathyroidism that can result in severe hypocalcemic seizures, dysmorphic facial features, and developmental delay (summary by Padidela et al., 2009 and Ratbi et al., 2015). |Congenital hypoparathyroidism in association with growth and mental retardation and seizures has been reported from the Middle East in children of consanguineous parents (Sanjad et al. (1988), Richardson and Kirk, 1990; Sanjad et al., 1991; Kalam and Hafeez, 1992). The first report, an abstract, was by Sanjad et al. (1988). The syndrome is sometimes known as the Sanjad-Sakati syndrome. Richardson and Kirk (1990) described the cases of 4 boys and 4 girls with this syndrome who were the products of 7 consanguineous marriages, 2 of the patients being brothers. In the remaining 6 families, a further 4 children had affected sibs who had died in infancy. The height, weight, and head circumference scores in all 8 children were less than -2 SD from the mean for their ages. Children had identical facies with deep-set eyes, depressed nasal bridge with beaked nose, long philtrum, thin upper lip, micrognathia, and large, floppy earlobes. Medullary stenosis and other skeletal defects were found in 7 of 8 children. Reduced numbers of T-cell subsets were found in 4 of 4 tested. From Saudi Arabia, Sanjad et al. (1991) described 12 affected infants, 6 girls and 6 boys, who were seen over a 3-year period. All had severe intrauterine growth retardation and postnatal growth retardation. Symptoms had occurred in the newborn period in 9 of them. The hypocalcemia was associated with hyperphosphatemia and very low concentrations of immunoreactive parathyroid hormone. None of the babies suffered from congenital heart disease. Cell-mediated immunity, measured in 5 patients, was normal. The propositus of Richardson and Kirk (1990) was born in the United Kingdom of first-cousin parents from Qatar. The other children were described simply as being 'of Middle-Eastern origin.' Although some features suggested DiGeorge syndrome (188400) or the Kenny-Caffey syndrome (127000), the conclusion was that it indeed represents a separate entity.|Marsden et al. (1994) described an affected 5-year-old Saudi Arabian girl born of consanguineous parents. Parathyroid hormone was undetectable, although her renal response to the infused hormone was normal. Growth hormone levels remained subnormal following arginine and L-DOPA stimulation. After clonidine, the growth hormone level rose to 15 ng/ml at 120 min. Treatment with human growth hormone produced a marked increase in height and weight. Marsden et al. (1994) suggested that regulation of parathyroid hormone may be controlled by the hypothalamus. |Hershkovitz et al. (1995) described 6 children of Arab origin with the syndrome of congenital hypoparathyroidism, severe growth retardation, developmental delay, and dysmorphism (microcephaly, facial and dental anomalies, and small hands and feet). Bone age was markedly retarded. Neither immunologic nor chromosomal abnormalities were found. Serum levels of insulin-like growth factor-1 (147440) measured in 2 patients were abnormally low. In an addendum, Hershkovitz et al. (1995) stated that, during the preparation of the manuscript, another 2 patients were born, bringing to 3 the number of affected sibs in each of 2 families. Both of the newly born patients had low birth weight, dysmorphic features similar to those in the other patients, and asymptomatic hypocalcemia that appeared a few days after birth. Parental consanguinity was evident in 3 families. In the first 6 patients, 3 were female and 3 were male. It was thought that the disorder did not conform to described forms of familial hypoparathyroidism (146200 and 307700) or to DiGeorge syndrome (188400); however, the ethnicity and clinical features indicated that it is the same disorder as that reported from Saudi Arabia. |Padidela et al. (2009) reported 6 children from 4 unrelated Middle Eastern families with HRDS confirmed by genetic analysis. All were homozygous for the founder 12-bp deletion in the TBCE gene (604934.0001). Brain imaging of all children showed hypoplasia of the anterior pituitary, infundibulum, and corpus callosum, as well as decreased white matter volume, delayed myelination, and dilated lateral ventricles. Four of five children tested had low levels of growth hormone and subnormal cortisol responses to glucagon, and all 6 had low plasma IGF1 (147440). All 3 males had clinical features suggestive of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, although testosterone responses to HCG were satisfactory. Padidela et al. (2009) suggested that TBCE may play a role in development of the anterior pituitary, corpus callosum, and white matter, in addition to the parathyroid glands. |Ratbi et al. (2015) reported a female infant, born of consanguineous Moroccan parents, with HRDS. She had intrauterine growth retardation, axial hypotonia, and developed seizures associated with hypocalcemia on the second day of life. Phosphate was increased and parathyroid hormone was severely decreased. Dysmorphic features included deep-set small eyes, depressed nasal bridge with a beaked nose, long philtrum, thin upper lip, micrognathia, and large floppy earlobes. She had no cardiac or skeletal manifestations and died at age 3 months from complications of hypoparathyroidism. |
241500::infantile hypophosphatasia is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygosity mutation in the gene encoding tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (ALPL; 171760) on chromosome 1p36.|Hypophosphatasia is an inborn error of metabolism characterized clinically by defective bone mineralization and biochemically by deficient activity of the tissue-nonspecific isoenzyme of alkaline phosphatase.|Fraser (1957) classified forms of hypophosphatasia according to age of onset: perinatal, infantile, childhood (241510), and adult (146300). Whyte (1988) indicated a fifth form of hypophosphatasia with primarily only dental manifestations, referred to as odontohypophosphatasia (see 146300). All of these forms are allelic. |Hypophosphatasia was first described by Rathbun (1948) in a 9-week-old male infant. In most cases, recessively inherited hypophosphatasia is a grave disorder, fatal in infancy. However, Bethune and Dent (1960) described 2 sisters in their 40s with skeletal trouble dating from childhood. Rathbun et al. (1961) stated that the heterozygote can be recognized by low serum levels of alkaline phosphatase. Pimstone et al. (1966) pointed out that premature shedding of teeth may be the only overt manifestation of the adult form. Three more or less distinct types can be identified: (1) type 1 with onset in utero or in early postnatal life, craniostenosis, severe skeletal abnormalities, hypercalcemia, and death in the first year or so of life; (2) type 2 with later, more gradual development of symptoms, moderately severe 'rachitic' skeletal changes and premature loss of teeth; (3) type 3 with no symptoms, the condition being determined on routine studies. |Eisenberg and Pimstone (1967) described a 50-year-old woman with hypophosphatasia but provided no family data. Macey (1940) reported 2 brothers with very low values for serum phosphatase who had 'rickets' in childhood and femoral pseudofractures in adulthood. O'Duffy (1970) reported on the occurrence of attacks of monoarthritis and widespread calcification of articular cartilage in a 51-year-old woman with hypophosphatasia. In a black kindred earlier reported by Whyte et al. (1986), Moore et al. (1990) observed 3 infants with hypophosphatasia. Although consanguinity was absent, the fathers of the 2 involved sibships were related as first cousins and the mothers were related as double first cousins. |Mehes et al. (1972) studied an inbred Hungarian village where among 198 school children they found 3 homozygotes and 12 heterozygotes for the juvenile form of hypophosphatasia. Study of the families brought to light 19 further cases. The study suggests that the severe infantile form and the mild juvenile type are separate. There was no instance of the infantile form in this group. Heterozygotes excreted phosphoethanolamine in the urine and suffered early loss of teeth. Among the offspring of a consanguineous marriage, Macfarlane et al. (1992) observed 1 sib with the lethal perinatal form of hypophosphatasia and a second with the infantile form. Although they were impressed with the differences in the 2, it is noteworthy that the child with the infantile form was severely affected and that the infant with the lethal perinatal form was 1 of dizygotic twins. |Scriver and Cameron (1969) described a female infant with classic clinical features of hypophosphatasia but consistently normal levels of alkaline phosphatase in plasma by the usual tests which use high substrate concentrations. It was found that at low substrate concentrations the patient's plasma hydrolyzed phosphoethanolamine more slowly than did normal plasma. This may be an allelic form of hypophosphatasia. Cole et al. (1985) restudied the patient of Scriver and Cameron (1969) at the age of 21 years. She was short (148 cm) and almost edentulous. She had had repeated midshaft femoral fractures that healed poorly, as well as scintigraphic evidence elsewhere of microfractures associated with bone pain. Although routine enzyme inhibition studies using p-nitrophenylphosphate yielded normal activity of the putative bone enzyme, serum and urinary phosphoethanolamine were elevated and serum pyridoxal-PO4 concentrations were markedly elevated--all characteristics of classic hypophosphatasia (Cole et al., 1986). Thus, pseudohypophosphatasia is an enzymopathy in which activity toward artificial substrates is preserved; lack of activity toward endogenous substrates results in a clinical picture indistinguishable from that of classic hypophosphatasia. Fedde et al. (1990) studied the substrate specificity of ALP and its subcellular localization in fibroblasts cultured from this patient. Defects in both were identified. There appeared to be 2 aberrant ALP species. One form had appropriate ecto-orientation as a lipid-anchored ectophosphatase of the plasma membrane but was preferentially deficient in activity toward natural substrates; the other ALP species had appropriate substrate specificity but was sequestered from substrates by its intracellular location. Moore et al. (1990) described a second case of pseudohypophosphatasia. |Rupprecht and Doerfel (1966) described sibs with an unusual syndrome characterized by micromelia with normal stature at birth, sometimes microcephaly, and severe epiphyseal and metaphyseal disturbances in the long bones, vertebrae and ribs. Of 6 sibs, a female and 2 males died at the age of a few weeks. All showed clonic convulsions, and at autopsy leptomeningeal hemorrhages. Spranger (1974) subsequently determined that the disorder in these sibs was hypophosphatasia.|Wolff and Zabransky (1982) described a case of the congenital and lethal form. There was no bony cranial vault and all 4 limbs were short, thick and bowed. In addition to phosphoethanolamine (PEA), inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), which is also a substrate of alkaline phosphatase, is elevated in plasma and in the urine. The pathogenesis of the bone disease may be related to PPi, a putative endogenous inhibitor of bone mineralization. The designation phosphoethanolaminuria is obviously inappropriate. Cementogenesis as well as osteogenesis is defective in hypophosphatasia; the defect in the former leads to early exfoliation of teeth. The observations of Eastman and Bixler (1982, 1983) suggest that the infantile and adult forms may be allelic. See hypophosphatasia, adult type (146300) and hypophosphatasia, childhood (241510). |Olsson et al. (1996) described the dental abnormalities in a 23-year-old man with hypophosphatasia first diagnosed at the age of 8 months. Histologically and radiographically verified signs of the condition were present in the permanent dentition. The findings included a reduced level of the marginal alveolar bone supporting the upper central incisors, which had to be extracted. The molars displayed large coronal pulp chambers. Histologically, the upper incisors demonstrated abnormal root cementum, with areas of dentin resorption, as well as disturbances of the mineralization of the coronal dentin. The patient also had signs of abnormal root resorption of molars.|The clinical signs in the perinatal type of hypophosphatasia show considerable overlap with osteogenesis imperfecta congenita (166210) and with achondrogenesis type IA (200600). Vandevijver et al. (1998) pointed out that, if present, 'spurs of the limbs are diagnostic for hypophosphatasia.' They presented a case of the lethal neonatal form of hypophosphatasia in which large skin-covered thornlike structures (spurs) extended from the lateral and medial sides of the knee joints and smaller ones from the lateral side of both elbows. Typical 'Bowdler spurs' are located symmetrically on the midshaft of the long bones (fibula, ulna, and radius) and underlie skin dimples. They can only be seen by x-ray. In contrast to the midshaft type of spurs, the joint variety as described in this case had been found by Goldstein et al. (1987), Spranger (1988), and Shohat et al. (1991). Sections of these spurs show disorganized bone and irregular calcification. |Unger et al. (2002) and Morava et al. (2002) reported 3 patients with cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD; 119600) and secondary hypophosphatasia. |
218700::congenital nongoitrous hypothyroidism-2 (CHNG2) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the PAX8 gene (167415) on chromosome 2q13.|For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of congenital nongoitrous hypothyroidism, see 275200.|In 80 to 85% of cases, congenital hypothyroidism is associated with, and presumably is a consequence of, thyroid dysgenesis (Macchia et al., 1998). In these cases, the thyroid gland can be absent (agenesis), ectopically located, and/or severely reduced in size (hypoplasia). When thyroid hormone therapy is not initiated within the first 2 months of life, congenital hypothyroidism can cause severe neurologic, mental, and motor damage (cretinism). |Thyroid dysgenesis is the most frequent cause of congenital hypothyroidism, accounting for 85% of cases (Fisher, 1983). Ectopic thyroid gland is the most frequent malformation, with thyroid tissue being found most often at the base of the tongue. Athyreosis is defined as the absence of any detectable thyroid tissue. |Athyreotic cretinism is not as clearly mendelizing as is goitrous cretinism. There is some familial aggregation which may be of the same type as is seen with many common congenital malformations. It is noteworthy that whether goiter is present or not is dependent on age and treatment. Under certain circumstances a patient who has the same defect as in one of the types of goitrous cretinism may appear to be athyreotic (Beierwaltes, 1964).|In an inbred Amish group, Cross et al. (1968) observed 2 sisters with cretinism and the Kocher-Debre-Semelaigne syndrome (myotonia and muscular pseudohypertrophy). Although no thyroid was palpable, sensitive scanning techniques showed the presence of a small amount of thyroid tissue in the neck. Thus, 'agoitrous cretinism' is a better designation than athyreotic cretinism. |Kaplan et al. (1977) described 2 nonconsanguineous Ashkenazi Jewish families in each of which a brother and sister had hypothyroidism associated with ectopia and hypoplasia of the thyroid. They cited another report of familial occurrence of ectopic thyroid (Mahoney and Igo, 1974). Hypothyroidism may not become evident until late childhood or adolescence. Cases reported by Gabr (1962) and Little et al. (1965) had severe cretinism. Thyroid-stimulating hormone was elevated. Rosenberg and Gilboa (1980) described 2 sisters with sublingual thyroid glands and hypothyroidism. A brother had agenesis of the left lobe of the thyroid but normal thyroid function. Donegan and Wood (1985) reported intratracheal thyroid in 2 sisters. In 1, the ectopic thyroid was involved in follicular carcinoma. |A possible relationship to inability to taste PTC (171200) was proposed by Shepard and Gartler (1960), Fraser (1961), Shepard and Andersen (1965). Both newborn athyreotic hypothyroidism and inability to taste PTC have a lower frequency in blacks than in whites. Nearly all patients with athyreotic hypothyroidism are PTC nontasters. |Scriver (2002) reported that he and his colleagues, in an unpublished study, found no disproportionate association of PTC taste type with the nonmendelian form of congenital hypothyroidism.|De Zegher et al. (1988) noted an association between growth hormone deficiency and congenital hypothyroidism. They pointed out the necessity for careful monitoring of growth in children treated for congenital hypothyroidism. |Eberle (1993) reported the case of a boy, almost 12 years old, with short stature, dysplastic epiphyses, and vertebral anomalies thought to be due to spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. Because of facial appearance, Aarskog syndrome (305400) had been suggested. The importance of recognizing the true nature of this patient's disorder as congenital hypothyroidism is obvious. |
243200::Buchheit et al. (1969) described 2 sisters with idiopathic intracranial hypertension with papilledema (pseudotumor cerebri). Traviesa et al. (1976) described 3 affected sisters. The patients are typically young females who are obese and may be pregnant or suffering from chronic dysfunctional uterine bleeding. Johnston and Morgan (1991) described a mother and 2 of 4 daughters who had a diagnosis of pseudotumor cerebri and 1 son who developed communicating hydrocephalus. |Warner et al. (2002) quantified vitamin A in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with idiopathic intracranial hypertension, elevated intracranial pressure of other causes, and normal intracranial pressure. Vitamin A could be detected by high-pressure liquid chromatography in most of the specimens. There was a significantly higher level of vitamin A in the cerebrospinal fluid of some patients with idiopathic intracranial hypertension. The authors concluded that vitamin A toxicity might play a role in the pathogenesis of idiopathic intracranial hypertension. |Katz et al. (2002) demonstrated the presence of both somatostatin receptor types 1 (182451) and 2 (182452) in all samples of normal human choroid plexus and arachnoid granulations. The authors proposed that these receptors might be involved in the processes of cerebrospinal fluid production and absorption and, thus, might play a role in the increased intracranial pressure of idiopathic intracranial hypertension. |
242600::iminoglycinuria is a digenic phenotype that can be caused by homozygous mutation in the SLC36A2 gene (608331) combined with heterozygous mutation in the SLC6A20 gene (605616) or homozygous mutation in the SLC6A19 gene (608893).|The imino acids, proline and hydroxyproline, share a renal tubular reabsorptive mechanism with glycine. Iminoglycinuria (IG), a benign inborn error of amino acid transport, is also a normal finding in neonates and infants under 6 months of age (Chesney, 2001). Early studies of families with iminoglycinuria suggested genetic complexity, with homozygotes developing IG and heterozygotes manifesting only hyperglycinuria (HG; 138500) (summary by Broer et al., 2008). |Iminoglycinuria may be more frequent in Ashkenazim than in others (Tancredi et al., 1970). |Iminoglycinuria also occurs as part of the generalized amino aciduria of the Fanconi renotubular syndrome (134600).|Rosenberg et al. (1968) found increased amounts of the 2 imino acids proline and hydroxyproline as well as glycine in the urine of a 6-year-old boy with congenital nerve deafness. Both parents had hyperglycinuria without imino aciduria. No defect in intestinal transport of these substances was found. These authors, as well as Whelan and Scriver (1968), concluded that iminoglycinuria is the homozygous form of the trait that presents as hyperglycinuria (HG; 138500) in the heterozygote. |Genetic heterogeneity in iminoglycinuria was suggested by the facts that only some apparent homozygotes show a defect in intestinal absorption of L-proline (Goodman et al., 1967; Scriver, 1968), and that only some obligate heterozygotes show hyperglycinuria with glycine loading (Scriver, 1968). Scriver (1968) observed the instructive case of an apparent homozygote's child whose father had hyperglycinuria and whose mother did not. He suggested that this child was a 'compound' carrying 2 different mutant alleles. Similar presumed genetic compounds for cystinuria (220100) had been observed. |Based on observations of inheritance patterns in affected families, Scriver (1989) suggested that the different putative mutations are allelic, inasmuch as the same renal phenotype had been observed in probands inheriting 2 'silent' mutant alleles, 2 'hyperglycinuric' alleles, or 2 different alleles. In addition, Scriver (1989) stated that several different forms of renal hyperglycinuria are known which must be distinguished from the hyperglycinuric phenotype that occurs in heterozygotes for the 'incompletely recessive' form of renal iminoglycinuria, e.g., hyperglycinuria and nephrolithiasis (138500), glucoglycinuria (138070), and x-linked hypophosphatemia with glucoglycinuria (see 307800).|Further heterogeneity is suggested by description of associated mental retardation (Statter et al., 1976). The deafness associated in the case of Rosenberg et al. (1968) and the blindness in the cases of Tancredi et al. (1970) and Fraser (1971) were probably coincidental associations related to the populations screened. |Saito et al. (1981) described atypical gyrate atrophy in a 44-year-old woman whose parents were first cousins and who showed strikingly increased urinary excretion of proline, hydroxyproline, and glycine. They suggested that the occurrence of gyrate atrophy with ornithinemia (258870), together with this observation, indicates that proline deficiency in chorioretinal tissues may be the mechanism of gyrate atrophy. |
161950::End-stage renal disease (ESRD) is a major public health problem, affecting 1 in 1,000 individuals and with an annual death rate of 20% despite dialysis treatment. IgA nephropathy (IgAN) is the most common form of glomerulonephritis, a principal cause of ESRD worldwide, affecting up to 1.3% of the population. Kidneys of patients with IgA nephropathy show deposits of IgA-containing immune complexes with proliferation of the glomerular mesangium. Typical clinical features include onset before age 40 with hematuria and proteinuria, and episodes of gross hematuria following mucosal infections are common; 30% of patients develop progressive renal failure. Although not generally considered a hereditary disease, striking ethnic variation in prevalence (Julian et al., 1985; D'Amico, 1987) and familial clustering (Scolari et al., 1999), along with subclinical renal abnormalities among relatives of cases, suggest a genetic component (Gharavi et al., 2000). |Genetic Heterogeneity of IgA Nephropathy|A locus for familial IgA nephropathy, called IGAN1, on chromosome 6q22-q23, was described by Gharavi et al. (2000). Another locus, IGAN2 (613944), was identified by Paterson et al. (2007) on chromosome 2q36. IGAN3 (616818) is caused by mutation in the SPRY2 gene (602466) on chromosome 13q31. |Polymorphisms in the ACE (106180) and AGT (106150) genes have been associated with progression to chronic renal failure in patients with IgA nephropathy.|IgA nephritis was first described by Berger and Hinglais (1968).|Katz et al. (1980) reported 2 brothers with typical clinical and pathologic features of IgA nephritis. One presented with gross hematuria in association with an upper respiratory tract infection and both continued to show persistent microscopic hematuria with normal renal function and an absence of systemic complaints. Renal biopsies showed generalized, segmental mesangial matrix increase with a predominance of IgA in mesangial regions and dense deposits on electron microscopy in a similar location. Another brother and 3 other members of this family had signs of glomerulonephritis. |Bene et al. (1983) stated that the presence also of C3, C9, and occasionally factor B and properdin in the mesangial deposits in Berger disease indicates that the disease is an 'immune complex nephritis.' They noted that recurrent upper respiratory infections or intestinal disease such as celiac disease or inflammatory bowel disease frequently antedate nephritis. |Coppo et al. (1986) reported that a gluten-free diet resulted in a decrease in levels of IgA containing immune complexes in patients with primary IgA nephropathy. They proposed that, in these patients, gluten may act to enhance an abnormal absorption of various alimentary antigens, rather than as a direct immunogen. Thus, dietary factors may have a pathogenetic role in primary IgA nephropathy and may explain its uneven geographic distribution. |Levy (1989) commented on the familial association of Berger disease and anaphylactoid purpura. It was suggested that IgA nephropathy and anaphylactoid purpura may share the same immunologic mechanisms and may also be the consequence of an inherited susceptibility. The possible usefulness of linkage studies was suggested. |Julian et al. (1988) suggested that IgA nephropathy is the most common form of glomerular nephritis worldwide. Initially, the prognosis of IgA nephropathy was presumed to be benign; however, it was later recognized that more than 50% of patients develop insidious chronic renal failure. Pharmacologic blockade of angiotensin I converting enzyme (ACE; 106180) attenuates a progression of chronic glomerular disease in several experimental models and the use of ACE inhibitors slows the progressive decline of renal function in diabetic patients. |
616483::infantile liver failure syndrome-2 (ILFS2) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the NBAS gene (608025) on chromosome 2p24.|Infantile liver failure syndrome-2 is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by recurrent episodes of acute liver failure during intercurrent febrile illness. Patients first present in infancy or early childhood, and there is complete recovery between episodes with conservative treatment (summary by Haack et al., 2015). For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of infantile liver failure syndrome, see ILFS1 (615438).|In 10 unrelated families, most apparently of European descent, Haack et al. (2015) identified 11 patients, aged 3 to 37 years, with onset of recurrent acute liver failure in infancy. Most patients had onset in the first 2 years of life, although 1 had the first episode at age 6 years. Episodic liver failure in these patients was precipitated by intercurrent febrile illness, and liver function recovered completely with conservative management in the interval. Crises were manifest by vomiting, lethargy, increased liver enzymes, jaundice, and coagulopathy. Some patients developed secondary hyperammonemia, hypoglycemia, or encephalopathy. Four patients had comorbid features, such as cardiomyopathy, autoimmune gastrointestinal disease, and epilepsy, but none of these features were present in more than 1 patient. None of the 11 patients died, but 2 had older sibs who died of acute liver failure in early infancy. |
266510::this form of peroxisome biogenesis disorder (PBD3B) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the PEX12 gene (601758) on chromosome 17. Mutations in the PEX12 gene also cause Zellweger syndrome (PBD3A; 614859).|The overlapping phenotypes of neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD) and infantile Refsum disease (IRD) represent the milder manifestations of the Zellweger syndrome spectrum (ZSS) of peroxisome biogenesis disorders. The clinical course of patients with the NALD and IRD presentation is variable and may include developmental delay, hypotonia, liver dysfunction, sensorineural hearing loss, retinal dystrophy, and visual impairment. Children with the NALD presentation may reach their teens, and those with the IRD presentation may reach adulthood (summary by Waterham and Ebberink, 2012). |For a complete phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of PBD(NALD/IRD), see 601539.|Individuals with mutations in the PEX12 gene have cells of complementation group 3 (CG3). For information on the history of PBD complementation groups, see 214100.|Christensen et al. (1990) described a patient with ataxia, dysarthric speech, dry skin, hypotonia, and absent reflexes. |Gootjes et al. (2004) reinvestigated the patient of Christensen et al. (1990), a girl from unrelated parents. At age 5 years, an elevated plasma level of phytanic acid was found, and physical examination revealed psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, ataxia, dysarthria, convergent strabismus, nystagmus, and absent deep tendon reflexes. CT of the brain, EMG, nerve conduction velocity (NCV), visual evoked potential (VEP), electroretinogram (ERG), auditory brainstem response (ABR), and somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP) were within normal limits. She was unable to walk without support. After treatment with a phytanic acid-restricted diet, she was able to take 3 or 4 steps without support. Bilateral sensory hearing loss was detected at age 8 years. Mental evaluation at age 15 years revealed a functional level of 7 to 8 years. Bilateral Achilles tendon extensions were performed at age 16 years. Because of persistent ataxia and instability of the lower extremities, triple arthrodeses of the ankles was done at age 20 and 22 years. She was eventually able to take approximately 30 steps without support. Electroretinogram at age 18 years showed lack of flicker response at 32 Hz, and ophthalmoscopy suggested early retinitis pigmentosa. She had no dysmorphic features. |Gootjes et al. (2004) described a patient, the child of consanguineous Arab Muslim parents, with a comparatively mild peroxisomal biogenesis disorder who was alive at the age of 8 years. The patient had broad nasal bridge, hypertelorism, external ear deformity, hypotonia, and psychomotor retardation. No cataract was present but there was nystagmus and hearing deficit. By age 4 years the patient could not sit or walk unsupported and had no intentional hand use. |
611283::isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ACAD8 gene (604773) on chromosome 11q25.|The first patient with isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (IBD) deficiency was described by Roe et al. (1998) and presented at age 12 months with dilated cardiomyopathy, anemia, and carnitine deficiency. An elevated C4-acylcarnitine was noted in a plasma acylcarnitine profile, but a subsequent urine organic acid analysis was normal. Treatment with oral L-carnitine supplementation led to catch-up growth and normalization of the cardiac status. Oglesbee et al. (2007) reported that the patient remained carnitine-dependent at almost 11 years of age.|Eight additional patients with IBD deficiency were reported by Koeberl et al. (2003), Sass et al. (2004), and Pedersen et al. (2006). All were identified by newborn screening when isolated elevation of C4-acylcarnitine prompted further diagnostic investigations. There was clinical information available on 6 of the 9 patients. Two patients remained asymptomatic for more than 1 year without treatment. One patient was noted to have muscle hypotonia and mild developmental delay at 8 months of age. Two patients were treated for speech delay at 5 years and 2 years of age, respectively, but had normal growth and development; and 1 patient was incidentally noted at 1 year of age to have mild branch peripheral pulmonary stenosis, which was detected by echocardiography to rule out a cardiomyopathy.|Oglesbee et al. (2007) reported an additional 13 patients with IBD deficiency who were identified by newborn screening due to an elevation of C4-acylcarnitine in dried blood spots. At the time of their report, 10 of the 13 remained asymptomatic, 2 were lost to follow-up, and 1 had required frequent hospitalizations due to emesis and dehydration during the first 2 years of life but was developing normally at 5 years of age. |
243500::isovaleric acidemia (IVA) is caused by homozygous mutation in the isovaleryl CoA dehydrogenase gene (IVD; 607036) on chromosome 15q15.|Isovaleric acidemia is an inborn error of leucine metabolism caused by a deficiency of isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase. It can present with severe neonatal ketoacidosis leading to death, but in milder cases recurrent episodes of ketoacidosis of varying degree occur later in infancy and childhood (summary by Vockley et al., 1991). |Two forms of isovaleric acidemia are recognized: the acute neonatal form, leading to massive metabolic acidosis from the first days of life and rapid death (e.g., Newman et al., 1967), and a chronic form in which periodic attacks of severe ketoacidosis occur with asymptomatic intervening periods (e.g., Tanaka et al., 1966). |Budd et al. (1967) observed brother and sister who, before the age of 6 months, showed retarded psychomotor development, a peculiar odor resembling sweaty feet, an aversion to dietary protein, and pernicious vomiting, leading to acidosis and coma. The unusual smell was identified as isovaleric acid, an intermediary of leucine, by experts of the Arthur D. Little Co., Industrial Consultants, Cambridge, Mass. |Sidbury et al. (1967) observed that 3 of 4 children of a second-cousin marriage died in the first 2 weeks of life with the following symptoms after the first 3 days: convulsions, lethargy, dehydration, moderate hepatomegaly, depressed platelets and leukocytes, and an unusual urinary odor like that of sweaty feet. Postmortem examination showed mainly changes related to the hematologic findings: hypoplastic marrow, scattered hemorrhages of viscera, and terminal septicemia. The unusual odor was the result of butyric and hexanoic acids. They suggested that it is an inborn error of short-chain fatty acid metabolism and, more specifically, that a defect in green acyl dehydrogenase may be involved. In a second family a brother and sister with unrelated parents had a similar ailment. These cases are considered to have been instances of isovaleric acidemia. |Ando et al. (1971) showed that isovaleric acidemia can produce hyperglycinemia and leukopenia, as well as episodic ketoacidosis, thus resembling propionic acidemia and methylmalonic acidemia.|Gerdes et al. (1988) described a patient with the chronic intermittent type of the disease, who was born to unrelated Icelandic parents. |In a review of inherited metabolic disorders and stroke, Testai and Gorelick (2010) noted that patients with branched-chain organic aciduria, including isovaleric aciduria, propionic aciduria (606054), and methylmalonic aciduria (251000) can rarely have strokes. Cerebellar hemorrhage has been described in all 3 disorders, and basal ganglia ischemic stroke has been described in propionic aciduria and methylmalonic aciduria. These events may occur in the absence of metabolic decompensation. |
254770::susceptibility to juvenile myoclonic epilepsy-1 (EJM1) is conferred by variation in the EFHC1 gene (608815) on chromosome 6p12.See also susceptibility to juvenile absence epilepsy (JAE, EAJ; 607631), which is also conferred by variation in the EFHC1 gene.|Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy is a subtype of idiopathic generalized epilepsy (EIG; see 600669) affecting up to 26% of all individuals with EIG. Individuals with JME have afebrile seizures only, with onset in adolescence of myoclonic jerks. Myoclonic jerks occur usually in the morning (Janz and Durner, 1997).|Susceptibility to EJM can be conferred by variation in several other genes: EJM5 (611136), by variation in the GABRA1 gene (137160) on 5q34; EJM6 (see 607682), by variation in the CACNB4 gene (601949) on 2q23; EJM7 (see 613060), by variation in the GABRD gene (137163) on 1p36; EJM8 (see 607628), by variation in the CLCN2 gene (600570) on 3q27; and EJM10 (617924), by variation in the ICK gene (612325) on chromosome 6p12.|In addition, EJM loci have been identified by linkage analysis: EJM2 (see 604827) on 15q14, EJM3 (608816) on 6p21, EJM4 (611364) on 5q12-q14, and EJM9 (614280) on 2q33-q36.|Dreifuss (1989) gave a clinical review. He reported the case of a young college woman who sought medical treatment after experiencing her first generalized convulsive seizure, which occurred after a period of sleep deprivation and alcohol consumption. She had recalled occasional myoclonic jerks when she awoke in the morning. The ictal EEG shows a typical 4- to 6-Hz multispike and wave complex; the interictal EEG may be normal. Valproate controls seizures in most JME patients. JME is said to account for between 5.4 and 10.2% of epilepsy, but despite clinical and EEG features that should enable its easy identification, the rate of misdiagnosis remains high (Grunewald et al., 1992). |Liu et al. (1995) stated that juvenile myoclonic epilepsy is the most frequent form of hereditary grand mal epilepsy. In the EEG, 15- to 30-Hz multispikes are associated with myoclonic and tonic-clonic convulsions beginning at 8 to 20 years of age. Moreover, EEG 3.5- to 6-Hz multispike wave complexes appear in clinically asymptomatic family members. |Medina et al. (2008) reported a 4-generation family from Honduras in which 4 individuals had clinical features of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy. The proband had childhood absence epilepsy (see, e.g., ECA1; 600131) evolving to JME, and his sister had JME. Two affected relatives had febrile seizures and grand mal seizures, respectively. Seven additional family members with the mutation were clinically asymptomatic but had epileptiform-EEG patterns consisting of spontaneous and frequent 3 to 6-Hz diffuse and bilateral multispike wave complexes or bifrontal 5 to 7-Hz spikes. |Camfield and Camfield (2009) performed a questionnaire-based review of 23 patients with JME after a mean disease duration of 25.8 years. The mean age at onset of first seizure was 10.4 years. All patients had myoclonic and generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and 14 (60%) had a history of absence seizures. At the time of follow-up, 11 (48%) had discontinued antiepileptic medication: 6 were seizure-free, 3 had myoclonic seizures only, and 2 continued to have rare seizures. Status epilepticus occurred in 8 (36%) and intractable epilepsy in 3. About 65 to 77% reported they were 'very satisfied' with work, health, friendships, and social life, but 17 (74%) of 23 had at least 1 major unfavorable social outcome, such as unemployment, living alone, or unplanned pregnancy. |
245050::succinyl-CoA:3-oxoacid-CoA transferase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the OXCT1 gene (601424) on chromosome 5p13.|Ketone bodies are major vectors of energy transfer from the liver to extrahepatic tissues and are the main source of lipid-derived energy for the brain. Mitchell et al. (1995) reviewed medical aspects of ketone body metabolism, including the differential diagnosis of abnormalities. As the first step of ketone body utilization, succinyl-CoA:3-oxoacid CoA transferase (SCOT, or OXCT1; EC 2.8.3.5) catalyzes the reversible transfer of CoA from succinyl-CoA to acetoacetate. |By study of cultured fibroblasts and postmortem tissue from a black male infant who died at age 6 months from severe intermittent ketoacidosis, Tildon and Cornblath (1972) found no measurable succinyl-CoA:3-ketoacid CoA-transferase activity. Other causes of ketoacidosis in the neonate include diabetes mellitus, type I glycogen storage disease (232200), propionic acidemia (606054), methylmalonic aciduria (251000), and lactic acidosis (245400). Other cases of succinyl-CoA:3-ketoacid-CoA transferase deficiency were described by Spence et al. (1973) and Middleton et al. (1987). Different clinical severity was demonstrated. |Perez-Cerda et al. (1992) reported the offspring of a consanguineous couple who had autosomal recessive OXCT deficiency. The affected girl had tachypnea, metabolic acidosis, and ketonuria at the age of 36 hours, and responded promptly to treatment. At the age of 4 years, the girl showed satisfactory psychomotor and physical development but had some episodes of ketosis, vomiting, and tachypnea associated with fasting, infections, stress, or prolonged physical exertion. Kassovska-Bratinova et al. (1996) cited reports of 6 patients in whom autosomal recessive deficiency of OXCT led to sustained hyperketonemia and episodes of severe ketoacidosis. |Snyderman et al. (1998) reported SCOT deficiency in the child of a consanguineous Pakistani couple. At 15 months of age, he was physically and developmentally normal, but had experienced several episodes of severe ketoacidosis requiring admission. SCOT activity was 8% of normal. Elevated levels of beta-hydroxybutyric acid and acetoacetic acid were detected in the urine. The authors suggested that instead of being very rare, this condition may be underdiagnosed. |Baric et al. (2001) reported a new case of SCOT deficiency who presented at 6 months of age with lethargy and severe metabolic acidosis. She had had only 1 other episode and had normal physical and psychomotor development, despite only 1% of normal enzyme activity. |Hori et al. (2013) reported a 7-month-old boy of Mexican origin with SCOT deficiency confirmed by genetic analysis that identified a homozygous mutation in the PXCT1 gene (601424.0007). The patient had recurrent ketoacidotic episodes in association with recurrent infections beginning at age 7 months. He then had permanent ketosis. Patient fibroblasts showed less than 10% residual OXCT1 activity and lack of detectable protein on immunoblot analysis. |
236800::hydroxykynureninuria is caused by homozygous mutation in the KYNU gene (605197), which encodes kynureninase, on chromosome 2q22. One such family has been reported.|Komrower et al. (1964) described a female patient, an only child, who excreted large amounts of kynurenine, 3-hydroxykynurenine, and xanthurenic acid in the urine. Absence of kynureninase resulting in a block in the pathway from tryptophan to nicotinic acid, was postulated. Under these circumstances tryptophan is no longer a source of nicotinic acid and deficiency of the vitamin can develop. The mother excreted 3 to 4 times normal amounts of xanthurenic acid. The father's excretion was at the upper limit of normal. |Tada et al. (1967) reported this disorder in a brother and sister with mental retardation. The parents were first cousins. The patients excreted excessive amounts of xanthurenic acid, kynurenic acid, 3-hydroxykynurenine, and kynurenine after tryptophan loading. This disturbance was temporarily corrected by large doses of vitamin B6. The activity of kynureninase in the liver was markedly reduced. The activity was appreciably restored by the addition of pyridoxal phosphate. |In 6 of 9 children born of first-cousin Algerian parents, Cheminal et al. (1996) found muscular hypertonia, psychomotor retardation, stereotyped gestures, congenital deafness, and nonprogressive encephalopathy. Each of the affected children had episodes of sudden worsening of their neurologic status. These episodes occurred spontaneously or during viral illnesses. At the age of 37 months, one female child had an episode of tachycardia, irregular breathing, and arterial hypotension, leading to coma and death. Two children developed renal tubular dysfunction and renal or metabolic acidosis. The only biochemical abnormality noted in these children was a massive hyperkynureninuria, seen only during periods of coma or after intravenous protein loading. Cheminal et al. (1996) suggested that a novel anomaly of tryptophan metabolism occurred in this family because the findings differed from those reported in other families with abnormalities of tryptophan metabolism in which kynureninemia occurred with clinical signs of cerebellar ataxia, developmental retardation, and pellagra (Komrower et al., 1964; Salih et al., 1985). See 260650. |Christensen et al. (2007) reported a patient who presented with jaundice and vomiting at 9 days of age. On routine screening, he was found to have an abnormal metabolite that was eventually identified as xanthurenic acid. The patient recovered, and grew and developed normally, with no issues at follow-up at age 6 years. Christensen et al. (2007) found high excretions of xanthurenic acid, kynurenin, and 3-hydroxykynurenin. |
236792::L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (L2HGA) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the L2HGDH gene (609584) on chromosome 14q21.|Duran et al. (1980) reported a 5-year-old boy of Moroccan (Berber) origin who was investigated for nonspecific mental and motor delay and growth deficiency. The point of interest was a solitary, large, and persistent increase of L-2-hydroxyglutaric (2OHglu) acid in the urine. Barth et al. (1992) reported on a total of 8 mentally retarded patients from 5 unrelated families, including 3 pairs of sibs. Four patients were male and 4 female. L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid concentration was also found to be increased in the cerebrospinal fluid and to a lesser extent in plasma. Lysine was also increased in plasma and CSF. Onset of symptoms was in childhood, and definite cerebellar dysfunction was identified in 7. In all patients, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an identical abnormal pattern with subcortical leukoencephalopathy, cerebellar atrophy, and signal changes in the putamina and dentate nuclei. No specific biochemical function or catabolic pathway involving L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid was known in mammals, including humans. Preliminary loading and dietary studies failed to reveal the origin of the compound. One of the 2 families from Turkey had consanguineous parents and 2 affected children. |Wilcken et al. (1993) reported 3 cases from Australia, and Divry et al. (1993) reported 2 other cases. Two of the patients reported by Wilcken et al. (1993) were sisters born to fourth-cousin parents. One of the patients of Divry et al. (1993) was a Tunisian boy born to consanguineous parents. Macrocephaly, cerebellar signs, and abnormalities suggesting leukodystrophy on CT or MRI were diagnostic clues, all of which suggest that urinary analysis for organic acids is indicated. |Fujitake et al. (1999) described L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria in 2 adult Japanese sisters, both of whom were much older (aged 57 and 47 years) than previously reported patients. MRI showed typical subcortical white matter lesions in both patients and brainstem atrophy and thickness of the calvarium in the elder sister. L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid levels were increased in urine, plasma, and CSF. The parents were not related and had no neurologic symptoms; the patients' 6 sibs also lacked neurologic symptoms. The elder sister had generalized tonic-clonic seizure and was found to have psychomotor retardation in childhood. Her mental and motor impairments were slowly progressive, especially after 25 years of age; she became unable to walk at the age of 46 years. The younger sister seemed normal until the age of 3 years, when she became unable to walk for 3 months after her first seizure. She was thought to have mild psychomotor impairment at school age but was able to work as an assistant in her father's factory after graduation from elementary school. At the age of 41 years, upon admission to another hospital for surgery of an atrial septal defect, she was found to have nocturnal myoclonus. Neurologic examination disclosed mild mental retardation and cerebellar speech, horizontal nystagmus and saccadic eye movement, dystonia of the right arm, mild limb and truncal ataxia, and ataxic gait. Her deep tendon reflexes were hyperactive. Manifestations were slowly progressive over the next 6 years. |Seijo-Martinez et al. (2005) reported a 15-year-old Spanish boy with L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria. He was wheelchair-bound and had severe mental retardation, epilepsy, bilateral optic atrophy, strabismus, hypoacusis, spastic tetraparesis, and choreodystonia of the upper limbs. He died suddenly of massive mesenteric thrombosis. Neuropathologic examination showed mild cortical neuronal loss with intense gliosis, spongiosis, and vacuolation of the neuropil. The subcortical white matter contained numerous hyperplastic astrocytes and was severely demyelinated with cystic cavities consistent with imaging results. The basal ganglia and cerebellum were less affected, with only mild neuronal loss and no cavitations; however, spongiosis was present. Cranial nerve nuclei were not affected. Seijo-Martinez et al. (2005) noted that Canavan disease (271900) should be the major consideration in differential diagnosis. |Aghili et al. (2009) reported a 17-year-old boy with L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria who developed an anaplastic ependymoma during the course of his disease. A literature review identified 7 other patients with L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria who developed brain tumors, suggesting an increased risk of brain tumors in this patient population. |
223000::congenital lactase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the LCT gene (603202) on chromosome 2q21.|Congenital lactase deficiency is a severe gastrointestinal disorder characterized by watery diarrhea in infants fed with breast milk or other lactose-containing formulas.|In disaccharide intolerance II, cellobiose intolerance would be expected as well as that for lactose. Sucrose, maltose, and starch are well tolerated. In a breastfed infant who developed watery diarrhea on the third day of life, Levin et al. (1970) demonstrated absent lactase in a specimen of duodenal mucosa which was histologically normal and showed normal maltase isomaltase and sucrase activities. Convincing direct demonstration of absent lactase in biopsies obtained in infancy has been achieved only twice before, according to the authors. A sister of the proband was probably identically affected. |Savilahti et al. (1983) reported 16 Finnish cases (10 male, 6 female) discovered during the previous 17 years. In each case the mother noted watery diarrhea, generally after the first feed of breast milk but at the latest by age 10 days. The 16 cases included 4 pairs of sibs. With the virtual disappearance of diarrhea as a cause of death in the first year of life, the authors believed that every case of congenital lactase deficiency in their population was discovered. Segregation analysis, assuming complete ascertainment, showed agreement with the number expected. The Finnish collection of 16 patients was especially impressive in light of the fact that only 18 cases had been reported elsewhere. The late consequences of this genetic disorder were not fully known. Affected persons might have less atherosclerosis than the average because they avoid dairy products, just as persons with fructose intolerance (229600) have fewer dental caries. |Jarvela et al. (1998) stated that, since 1966, 42 patients with congenital lactase deficiency had been diagnosed in Finland. In this disorder an almost total lack of lactase-phlorizin hydrolase activity is found in jejunal biopsy material. In adult-type hypolactasia (223100), the most common genetic enzyme deficiency in humans, this enzyme activity is reduced to 5 to 10%. |Congenital lactose intolerance is probably a different disorder related to gastric absorption of lactose and lactosuria.|
607330::lathosterolosis can be caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SC5DL gene (602286) on chromosome 11q23.|Brunetti-Pierri et al. (2002) reported the clinical, biochemical, and molecular characterization of a patient with a previously undescribed defect of cholesterol biosynthesis. The female patient presented with a complex phenotype, including multiple congenital anomalies, mental retardation, and liver disease. Physical examination at birth revealed dysmorphic features, including severe microcephaly, receding forehead, anteverted nares, micrognathia, prominent upper lip, highly arched palate, postaxial hexadactyly of the left foot, and syndactyly between the second to fourth toes and between the fifth toe and the extra digit. External genitalia were normal. Severe psychomotor delay became increasingly evident with age. The clinical features somewhat resembled those of Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (270400), which is caused by a defect in cholesterol biosynthesis. |Rossi et al. (2007) provided follow-up on the patient reported by Brunetti-Pierri et al. (2002) and described her affected sib. The sib was a fetus aborted at 21 weeks' gestation following a routine ultrasound that revealed multiple malformations. Postmortem findings included type II Arnold-Chiari malformation, microcephaly, postaxial polydactyly (hands and feet), bilateral clubfeet, and lumbosacral meningocele. A diagnosis of lathosterolosis was suspected on the basis of the pattern of limb and craniofacial anomalies. Molecular analysis in DNA samples obtained from stored pathologic specimens of the SC5DL gene revealed the same mutations identified in her living sister (602286.0001-602286.0002), confirming the diagnosis. The sister had developed bilateral lens opacities at age 6, which subsequently evolved to a total cataract of the right eye, requiring surgery. She had severe cholestasis with liver fibrosis and persistently elevated serum levels of transaminases, gamma-glutamyltransferase, alkaline phosphatase, total and direct bilirubin, and ammonia. Portal hypertension was noted on abdominal Doppler ultrasound at 7 years of age. The girl had experienced 2 pathologic fractures, and DEXA scan at 7.5 years revealed severe generalized osteoporosis. Blood smears revealed anisopoikilocytosis, acanthocytes, schistocytes, large platelets, and vacuolated monocytes. Electron microscopy of cultured fibroblasts showed concentric lamellar inclusion bodies, similar to lysosomal vacuoles visible in fibroblasts from patients with Niemann-Pick type C disease (257220). |
500001::the disorder is caused by mutation in the mitochondrial complex I, subunit ND6 gene (MTND6; 516006), the complex I, subunit ND4 gene (MTND4; 516003), the complex I, subunit ND1 gene (MTND1; 516000), and the MTND3 gene (516002).|Marsden et al. (1986) reported a unique disorder in 7 members of 2 families in whom dystonia was variably associated with subacute visual loss or asymptomatic optic atrophy, and striking bilateral symmetric lucencies, especially in the putamen, were found on computerized tomography. Marsden et al. (1986) suggested that the disorder in a family reported by Miyoshi et al. (1969) may have been the same, as well as that in the large kindred reported by Novotny et al. (1985). |Novotny et al. (1986) reported an American Hispanic family with Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON; 535000) in which maternal relatives in the pedigree ranged from normal, to adult-onset optic atrophy, to pediatric dystonia associated with bilateral striatal necrosis. The later individuals experienced early-onset dementia with asymmetric dystonia, bulbar dysfunction, corticospinal tract abnormalities, and short stature. Computerized tomography and magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed basal ganglia abnormalities, designated as 'infantile bilateral striatal necrosis,' with the onset of striatal necrosis between ages 1.5 and 9 years. One severely affected individual developed bilateral striatal necrosis, and later developed optic atrophy. Muscle biopsy of 1 severely affected individual showed excessive variation in fiber size and increased central nuclei, but no ragged-red fibers or ultrastructural abnormalities of mitochondria. One interesting feature of this pedigree is that LHON predominated in the earlier generations while dystonia predominated in the more recent generations. In generations I to III, of 22 maternal relatives, 7 (32%) had LHON while 2 (9%) had dystonia. By contrast, of the 20 maternal relatives in generation IV and V, 1 (5%) had LHON, 1 (5%) had both LHON and dystonia, and 12 (60%) had dystonia (Novotny et al., 1986; Wallace et al., 1985).|Spruijt et al. (2007) reported a 35-year-old woman with sequential left and right vision loss, optic nerve atrophy, and bilateral central scotoma consistent with LHON. Serum and CSF lactate levels were increased, and brain MRI showed a few punctate white matter abnormalities. Her 34-year-old brother had developed progressive spastic dystonia beginning at age 3 years. Since age 27, he was wheelchair-bound with mental retardation, scoliosis, dysarthria, strabismus without ophthalmoplegia, and accumulation of abnormal mitochondria on sural nerve biopsy. His brain MRI showed bilateral hyperintensities in the putamen. Muscle biopsies from the sister and brother showed 8% and 16% residual complex I activity, respectively. |Wang et al. (2009) reported a large Chinese Han family in which 6 members had Leber optic atrophy and dystonia. The proband, who was most severely affected, developed an abnormal gait at age 5 years after a bout of diarrhea. At age 14 years, he had painless and progressive visual loss, and lost ambulation due to dystonia. There was no evidence of mental or psychomotor retardation. By the third decade, he was unable to stand or speak clearly. Neurologic exam showed generalized spastic dystonia involving the limbs, trunk, neck, and face, with diffuse muscle wasting. Brain MRI showed abnormal signals in the basal ganglia. Other family members had a similar, but less severe, disease course with spastic gait, dystonia, visual loss, and basal ganglia lesions. Nine additional family members had sudden onset of painless vision loss due to optic atrophy between ages 14 and 30 years, but without other symptoms. A tenth patient had loss of vision and was found to have postural tremor, hyperreflexia, and unstable gait. The phenotype was variable within this family. |
245900::Norum disease is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase gene (LCAT; 606967) on chromosome 16q22.The LCAT gene is also mutant in fish-eye disease (136120).|Lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency is a disorder of lipoprotein metabolism and causes a typical triad of diffuse corneal opacities, target cell hemolytic anemia, and proteinuria with renal failure.|In Norway, Norum and Gjone (1967) described an error of lipid metabolism in sisters with normochromic anemia, proteinuria, and corneal deposits of lipid. Total serum cholesterol was elevated, almost all of it being free cholesterol. Lack of plasma lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase was postulated. Gjone and Norum (1968) reported the clinical features in 3 adult sisters who showed only traces of esterified cholesterol in the serum. All had proteinuria and anemia. Total cholesterol, triglyceride, and phospholipid were increased. Lysolecithin of serum was decreased. Foam cells were present in the bone marrow and in the glomerular tufts of the kidney. The tonsils were normal. The liver was not enlarged and there was no evidence of liver disease which might account for a defect in cholesterol esterification. The anemia is hemolytic and associated with an increased content of cholesterol in red cells. Patients may succumb to renal failure. |Borysiewicz et al. (1982) described a family from County Mayo, Ireland, with 3 affected sisters and a brother who was probably affected. They stated that 10 families and a total of 21 affected persons had previously been identified. The patients had the typical triad of diffuse corneal opacities, target cell hemolytic anemia, and proteinuria with renal failure. |Vergani et al. (1983) reported an asymptomatic 18-year-old Italian patient who came to medical attention because of proteinuria. His father had had myocardial infarction at age 38 and died suddenly at age 48. The proband showed corneal opacities with intensification near the limbus resembling corneal arcus. Sakuma et al. (1982) and Murayama et al. (1984) described Japanese patients. Weber et al. (1987) described the first German patient. They stated that previously 18 families with a total of 35 affected persons had been reported. |In India, Muthusethupathi et al. (1999) described 2 brothers in their thirties who presented with renal failure and were found to have corneal opacities. One had bilateral corneal clouding; the other had bilateral sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy. The older brother underwent renal transplantation and was doing well 9 years after operation. Both patients had anemia with target cells, and the bone marrow in 1 patient showed 'sea-blue' histiocytes. This was the first report of LCAT deficiency from India. |
220111::the French Canadian type of Leigh syndrome is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the LRPPRC gene (607544) on chromosome 2p21.|The French Canadian type of Leigh syndrome is an autosomal recessive severe neurologic disorder with onset in infancy. Features include delayed psychomotor development, mental retardation, mild dysmorphic facial features, hypotonia, ataxia, and the development of lesions in the brainstem and basal ganglia. Affected individuals tend to have episodic metabolic and/or neurologic crises in early childhood, which often lead to early death (summary by Debray et al., 2011). |For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Leigh syndrome, see 256000.|Two clinical forms of cytochrome c oxidase (COX, complex IV) deficiency (220110) are recognized (DiMauro et al., 1990): a 'muscular' form in which marked weakness predominates, and a 'nonmuscular' form presenting with Leigh disease, a neurodegenerative condition of the brainstem, cerebellum, and basal ganglia, with symmetric, well-demarcated regions of necrosis, gliosis, and vascular proliferation (van Erven et al., 1987). Leigh disease can also result from other inborn errors of energy metabolism, such as pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency (266150), complex I deficiency (252010), and mutation in a mitochondrial DNA gene for complex V (516060). |In the Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean (SLSJ) region of Quebec province in Canada, Merante et al. (1993) described a biochemically distinct form of Leigh syndrome with COX deficiency. Thirty-four children were observed to have a similar phenotype consisting of developmental delay, hypotonia, mild facial dysmorphism, chronic well-compensated metabolic acidosis, and high mortality due to episodes of severe acidosis and coma. Enzyme activity was close to normal in kidney and heart, 50% of normal in fibroblasts and skeletal muscle, and nearly absent in brain and liver. The deficiency of enzyme activity appeared to result from a failure to assemble an active enzyme complex. The cDNA sequences of cytochrome oxidase subunits VIa and VIIa were normal. Merante et al. (1993) demonstrated that the underlying defect was deficiency of COX, which was particularly severe in the liver. |Morin et al. (1993) described the clinical findings of 15 of the 34 patients referred to by Merante et al. (1993) who had biochemical evidence of COX deficiency. Fifteen patients in whom clinical findings were reported in detail were aged 6 months to 11 years; 11 children died in episodes of fulminant metabolic acidosis. These patients had elevated blood and cerebrospinal fluid lactate levels, decreased blood bicarbonate levels, and normal blood pH. Characteristic changes of Leigh disease were found in the central nervous system and microvesicular steatosis was found in the liver in all affected patients in whom postmortem examination was performed. Merante et al. (1993) found that the severity of the biochemical defect varied greatly in different tissues. The activity of COX in skin fibroblasts, amniocytes, and skeletal muscle was 50% of normal, while in kidney and heart it was close to normal. Brain and liver, on the other hand, had very low activities. The deficiency of activity appeared to result from a failure of assembly of the cytochrome oxidase complex in liver, but levels of mRNA for both mitochondrially encoded and nuclear-encoded subunits in liver and skin fibroblasts were found to be the same as those in controls. The cDNA sequence of the liver-specific cytochrome oxidase subunits VIa and VIIa were determined in samples from patient liver and skin fibroblasts and showed normal coding sequence. Segregation analysis was consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance. |Debray et al. (2011) retrospectively reviewed the clinical course of 56 patients with genetically confirmed French Canadian Leigh syndrome. The median age at onset was 5 months, and patients presented with neonatal distress, psychomotor delay, failure to thrive, ataxia, and acute metabolic acidosis. Other features during the neonatal period included hypotonia (58%), transient tachypnea of the newborn (47%), poor sucking (44%), tremor (28%), and hypoglycemia (17%). There were mild craniofacial features such as prominent forehead, midfacial hypoplasia, wide nasal bridge, hypertelorism, hirsutism, and arched eyebrows. All had developmental and language delay. Older ambulatory patients had truncal ataxia with wide-based gait and mild intention tremor. Most (90%) had 1 or more episodes of acute metabolic and/or neurologic decompensation, most of which (82%) resulted in death at a median age of 1.6 years. Metabolic crises were often associated with an infectious illness and were characterized by increased serum lactate, hyperglycemia, hypotonia, coma, liver dysfunction, shock, respiratory distress, and multiorgan failure. Neurologic crises were characterized by hypotonia, ataxia, coma, abnormal breathing patterns, seizures, and stroke-like episodes. There was a higher incidence of these acute episodes in patients with LRPPC mutations compared to patients with Leigh syndrome due to SURF1 (185620) mutations (see 256000). |Olahova et al. (2015) reported 10 patients from 7 unrelated families that were not of French Canadian origin who had a severe neurodevelopmental disorder associated with biallelic LRPPRC mutations. Most presented at birth with lactic acidosis, hypotonia, and severely delayed psychomotor development with absent speech, although a few patients had normal early development with episodic decompensation and developmental regression associated with infection. A few patients had mild nonspecific dysmorphic features. Six patients died in infancy or early childhood. Those that survived showed variable neurologic features, including dystonia, ataxia, dysphagia, strabismus, and seizures. Neuroimaging in 2 patients showed features consistent with Leigh syndrome, but lesions were absent in other patients. Three had a striking leukoencephalopathy and 4 had cerebral malformations, such as cerebellar hypoplasia, gyral abnormalities, and hippocampal abnormalities. Other features included hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (in 2 patients), hypospadias (2 patients), anteriorly placed anus (1 patient), polysyndactyly (1 patient), and complex congenital heart disease (1 patient). All patients tested had variably decreased complex IV activity in fibroblasts and/or muscle tissue (range 3 to 70% residual activity). |
256000::extensive genetic heterogeneity in Leigh syndrome. Mutations have been identified in both nuclear- and mitochondrial-encoded genes involved in energy metabolism, including mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes I, II, III, IV, and V, which are involved in oxidative phosphorylation and the generation of ATP, and components of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.|Leigh syndrome is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder resulting from defective mitochondrial energy generation. It most commonly presents as a progressive and severe neurodegenerative disorder with onset within the first months or years of life, and may result in early death. Affected individuals usually show global developmental delay or developmental regression, hypotonia, ataxia, dystonia, and ophthalmologic abnormalities, such as nystagmus or optic atrophy. The neurologic features are associated with the classic findings of T2-weighted hyperintensities in the basal ganglia and/or brainstem on brain imaging. Leigh syndrome can also have detrimental multisystemic affects on the cardiac, hepatic, gastrointestinal, and renal organs. Biochemical studies in patients with Leigh syndrome tend to show increased lactate and abnormalities of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. Thus, Leigh syndrome may be a clinical feature of a primary deficiency of any of the mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes: complex I deficiency (see 252010), complex II deficiency (see 252011), complex III deficiency (see 124000), complex IV deficiency (cytochrome c oxidase; see 220110), or complex V deficiency (see 604273) (summary by Lake et al., 2015). |Mutations in complex I genes include mitochondrial-encoded MTND2 (516001), MTND3 (516002), MTND5 (516005), and MTND6 (516006), the nuclear-encoded NDUFS1 (157655), NDUFS3 (603846), NDUFS4 (602694), NDUFS7 (601825), NDUFS8 (602141), NDUFA2 (602137), NDUFA9 (603834), NDUFA10 (603835), NDUFA12 (614530), NDUFAF6 (612392), and NDUFAF5 (612360). Mutation in the MTFMT gene (611766), which is involved in mitochondrial translation, has also been reported with complex I deficiency.|A mutation has been found in a complex III gene: BCS1L (603647), which is involved in the assembly of complex III.|Mutations in complex IV genes include mitochondrial-encoded MTCO3 (516050) and nuclear-encoded COX10 (602125), COX15 (603646), SCO2 (604272), SURF1 (185620), which is involved in the assembly of complex IV, TACO1 (612958), and PET100 (614770).|A mutation has been found in a complex V gene: the mitochondrial-encoded MTATP6 (516060).|Mutations in genes encoding mitochondrial tRNA proteins have also been identified in patients with Leigh syndrome: see MTTV (590105), MTTK (590060), MTTW (590095), and MTTL1 (590050).|Leigh syndrome may also be caused by mutations in components of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (e.g., DLD, 238331 and PDHA1, 300502).|The French Canadian (or Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean) type of Leigh syndrome with COX deficiency (LSFC; 220111) is caused by mutation in the LRPPRC gene (607544).|Deficiency of coenzyme Q10 (607426) can present as Leigh syndrome.|This condition was first described by Leigh (1951) in a patient with foci of necrosis and capillary proliferation in the brainstem. Feigin and Wolf (1954) observed 2 affected sibs from a consanguineous mating. Because of similarity to Wernicke encephalopathy (277730), they suggested that a genetic defect in some way related to thiamine was present (see HISTORY). Ford (1960) referred to 2 affected sibs, and Clark (1964) pictured the histopathology of 1 of them. The main biochemical findings were high pyruvate and lactate in the blood and slightly low glucose levels in blood and cerebrospinal fluid. Hommes et al. (1968), who studied a family with 3 affected sibs, found absence of pyruvate carboxylase in the liver and concluded that gluconeogenesis was impaired. Clayton et al. (1967) demonstrated therapeutic benefit of lipoic acid. Montpetit et al. (1971) pointed out similarity in the distribution and histology of the lesions of SNE to those of Wernicke disease. They tabulated instances of affected sibs and consanguineous parents. Kohlschutter et al. (1978) reported 2 sisters and a brother born of consanguineous parents. |Gordon et al. (1974) noted that since oxidation of pyruvate is dependent on a multienzyme complex (the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex), it is likely that a number of apoenzyme and coenzyme deficiencies could lead to this disorder. Whereas Kustermann-Kuhn et al. (1984) had found that activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex was not deficient in the brain of 3 autopsied cases of Leigh disease, Kretzschmar et al. (1987) reported a patient with well-documented clinical and biochemical pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency who at postmortem examination was found to have the specific CNS pathologic changes of Leigh disease. |Gilbert et al. (1983) reported an infant with pyruvate carboxylase deficiency (266150). Pathologic studies showed extensive necrotic areas in the brain, which the authors considered to be consistent with Leigh disease. |Rutledge et al. (1981) pointed out that hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH; see 192600) is a frequent associated finding. Of 12 autopsy cases, 7 (including a pair of sibs) had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and 4 of these had asymmetric septal hypertrophy. The authors suggested that this feature may be useful in premortem diagnosis.|Van Erven et al. (1987) reported 4 sibs (1 male, 3 female) of unrelated parents with what the authors considered to be an autosomal recessive juvenile form of Leigh syndrome. They detected no abnormalities of pyruvate metabolism in urine and serum, but all patients had marked elevations of CSF pyruvate and lactate concentrations. Although the affected sibs lived to adulthood, they were severely affected and 1 of them died at age 17 years. The mother had the onset of neurologic signs and symptoms at age 56 years. The authors suggested a defect restricted to the brain. |Van Maldergem et al. (2002) reported 2 sisters with facial dysmorphism who had axial hypotonia and failure to thrive in infancy. Other phenotypic characteristics included mental retardation, abnormal gait, spasticity, hyperreflexia, muscle atrophy, elevated lactic acid, and hypersignals in the caudate and putamen in 1 patient. They were both given a diagnosis of Leigh syndrome. Supplementation with coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) resulted in marked clinical improvement. Investigation revealed markedly decreased muscle CoQ10 levels: 5% in 1 sister before treatment and 60% in the other during treatment. Lymphoblasts from both sisters showed 50% reduction of CoQ10. Van Maldergem et al. (2002) suggested that CoQ10 deficiency (607426) can present as Leigh syndrome. |Willems et al. (1977) described deficiency of complex IV, cytochrome c oxidase, in muscle of a child who died at age 6 years of Leigh syndrome. The patient had markedly higher levels of pyruvate and lactate in CSF compared with blood. Miyabayashi et al. (1983) reported 2 brothers with deficiency of cytochrome c oxidase which was demonstrated not only in biopsied skeletal muscle but also in liver, brain, and cultured fibroblasts. One of the brothers was well until age 5 when nystagmus and incoordination began. At age 8 he was hospitalized because of difficulty walking and truncal ataxia triggered by rubella. He had moderate elevation of blood lactate after mild exercise and histochemically biopsied muscle showed markedly low cytochrome c oxidase activity. The second brother developed normally until age 10 months when dysphagia, muscular hypotonia and abnormal eye movements appeared and became progressively worse. He died in respiratory arrest 6 months later. Autopsy showed the morphologic changes of Leigh encephalomyelopathy. |Glerum et al. (1987) reported a male infant with developmental delay, hypotonia, nystagmus, optic disc pallor, and episodic metabolic acidosis. Brain CT scan showed basal ganglia hypodensities and cerebral atrophy. Blood lactate and pyruvate levels were increased. The disorder followed a progressive course, and the patient died at 3.5 years of age. Biochemical studies showed a kinetically abnormal cytochrome oxidase complex. The authors hypothesized that reduced ATP production and chronic intracellular acidosis may have contributed to the observed pathology in oxidative areas of the basal ganglia and brainstem in this patient. |In a 4-year-old daughter of consanguineous Mauritanian parents, Ogier et al. (1988) described severe muscle cytochrome c oxidase deficiency without clear evidence of clinical muscle abnormality. The child had the de Toni-Fanconi-Debre renal syndrome and acute neurologic deterioration resembling Leigh syndrome. Metabolic studies showed elevated cerebrospinal fluid lactate values contrasting with normal blood lactate, and high 3-hydroxybutyrate/acetoacetate ratio with normal lactate/pyruvate ratio. |
614962::nonsyndromic morbid obesity can be caused by homozygous mutation in the leptin gene (LEP; 164160) on chromosome 7q32.|Montague et al. (1997) described 2 morbidly obese cousins, an 8-year-old girl and a 2-year-old boy, from an inbred Pakistani kindred. Although of normal weight at birth, both children suffered from severe, intractable obesity from an early age. The children had no additional clinical features to suggest that they might have a pleiotropic genetic syndrome associated with obesity. Montague et al. (1997) found that serum leptin levels in both patients were very low despite their markedly elevated fat mass. The female patient weighed 86 kg at the age of 8 years, with 57% body fat and height of 137 cm. Her birth weight had been normal, but she gained weight rapidly in the early postnatal period and was clearly outside the normal range by 4 months of age. As the result of her obesity she developed abnormalities of growth in the long bones of the legs, resulting in the need for corrective orthopedic surgery. She underwent liposuction of lower limb fat at the age of 6 years in an attempt to improve her mobility. Her affected cousin, a male aged 2 years, had a weight of 29 kg, with 54% body fat. He had difficulty in walking because of extreme obesity. He likewise was of normal weight at birth but rapidly became obese, deviating far above the normal range by 3 months of age. Both children had a clear history of marked hyperphagia, being noted from early infancy to be constantly hungry, demanding food continuously, and eating considerably more than their sibs. Thus, in both mice and humans, congenital leptin deficiency is associated with normal birth weight followed by rapid development of severe obesity associated with hyperphagia and impaired satiety. Detailed assessment of energy expenditure in these children had not been performed, although their mean body temperatures were within the normal range. Since they were prepubertal, it was impossible to determine whether they would show hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with sterility, which is found in ob/ob mice; serum concentrations of luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, estradiol, and testosterone were at prepubertal levels. In contrast to ob/ob mice, which are markedly hypercortisolemic, plasma cortisol levels in both children were within the reference range. Fasting plasma glucose was normal in both children, but fasting insulin levels were elevated in the older child, consistent with the hyperinsulinemia and insulin resistance seen in ob/ob mice. None of the 4 heterozygous parents nor the one heterozygous sib was morbidly obese, a finding consistent with the absence of severe obesity in the murine heterozygotes. |Farooqi et al. (1999) followed up on the older of the 2 cousins described by Montague et al. (1997), then 9 years of age. She had marked hyperphagia, was constantly hungry, demanded food continually, and was disruptive when denied food. As a result of her severe obesity, valgus deformities of the legs developed, for which she required bilateral proximal tibial osteotomies. When she was 6 years old, liposuction was performed to remove fat from her legs. Although there were no normative data for a child of this weight, there was no evidence of substantial impairment in her basal or total energy expenditure, and her body temperature was normal, which is not the case in ob/ob mice, whose oxygen consumption, energy expenditure, and body temperature are low (Trayhurn et al., 1977). Thus, leptin may be less central to the regulation of energy expenditure in humans than in mice. Another difference in all humans with either leptin or leptin receptor mutations is the consistently normal glucocorticoid concentrations, in contrast to the marked excess in ob/ob mice. |Farooqi et al. (2002) described a third child with leptin deficiency, from a consanguineous family of Pakistani origin living in the United Kingdom. Leptin deficiency was associated with reduced numbers of circulating CD4+ T cells and impaired T cell proliferation and cytokine release, all of which were reversed by recombinant human leptin administration. |Gibson et al. (2004) reported a child of consanguineous Pakistani parents in Canada who presented with severe hyperphagia and obesity. The family originated from the same area of Pakistan as the 2 United Kingdom families reported by Montague et al. (1997) and Farooqi et al. (2002), but was not known to be related over 4 generations. Four years of therapy with subcutaneous injections of recombinant leptin had dramatically beneficial effects on weight, appetite, metabolism, and neuroendocrine phenotypes and was associated with clinical improvement in asthma and recurrent infections. Biochemical hypothyroidism, which was persistent before treatment, was completely reversed by leptin therapy.Infertility due to hypothalamic-pituitary hormone insufficiency is a feature of leptin-deficient ob/ob mice. Two of the homozygous individuals in the Turkish kindred of Strobel et al. (1998) were adults. One had primary amenorrhea; the male homozygote never entered puberty and had clinical features of hypogonadism: no beard, scanty pubic and axillary hair, bilateral gynecomastia, and small penis and testes. Testosterone rose after administration of human chorionic gonadotropin (see 118860) in the latter patient, and normal responses to gonadotropin-releasing hormone (152760) were also demonstrated. As in ob/ob mice, a sympathetic system dysfunction (low sympathetic tone) was observed in the propositus. The cold pressor test elicited an abnormally small response in systolic and diastolic blood pressures, and orthostatic hypotension was demonstrated. The phenotype of these adult patients suggested that leptin not only controls body mass but also is a necessary signal for the initiation of human puberty. |Wabitsch et al. (2015) studied a Turkish boy with early-onset extreme obesity who presented with a weight of 33.7 kg (BMI, 38.6) at 2.5 years of age. He was of normal weight at birth, but rapid weight gain started in the postnatal period. His parents reported food-seeking behavior, and he exhibited hyperphagia in an ad libitum test meal. He had a history of recurrent ear and pulmonary infections, requiring 2 intensive-care hospitalizations for severe pneumonia. Laboratory evaluation revealed an elevated serum leptin level but normal T-lymphocyte counts, subpopulation ratios, and function. The patient responded to the administration of exogenous metreleptin with a rapid change in eating behavior and a corresponding decrease in weight, from 43 to 35 kg, and in BMI, from 44 to 34. |
300322::Lesch-Nyhan syndrome is caused by mutation in the HPRT gene (308000), encoding hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase, on chromosome Xq26.|The features of the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome are mental retardation, spastic cerebral palsy, choreoathetosis, uric acid urinary stones, and self-destructive biting of fingers and lips. Megaloblastic anemia has been found in some patients (van der Zee et al., 1968). |Virtually complete deficiency of HPRT residual activity (less than 1.5%) is associated with the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, whereas partial deficiency (at least 8%) is associated with the Kelley-Seegmiller syndrome (300323). LNS is characterized by abnormal metabolic and neurologic manifestations. In contrast, Kelley-Seegmiller syndrome is usually associated only with the clinical manifestations of excessive purine production. Renal stones, uric acid nephropathy, and renal obstruction are often the presenting symptoms of Kelley-Seegmiller syndrome, but rarely of LNS. After puberty, the hyperuricemia in Kelley-Seegmiller syndrome may cause gout. A third group of patients, with 1.5 to 8% of HPRT activity, is associated with a neurologic variant of LNS, with uric acid overproduction and neurologic disability that varies from minor clumsiness to debilitating extrapyramidal and pyramidal motor dysfunction (Jinnah and Friedmann, 2001).|Bakay et al. (1979) restudied a patient with HPRT deficiency, choreoathetosis, spasticity, dysarthria, and hyperuricemia, but normal intelligence and no self-mutilation. (A maternal uncle had been identically affected.) Although HPRT deficiency seemed to be complete, cultured fibroblasts had some capacity for metabolism of hypoxanthine and guanine. Page et al. (1987) described 2 brothers and 2 of their maternal uncles who had HPRT deficiency as the cause of mild mental retardation, spastic gait, and pyramidal tract sign. They were, furthermore, short of stature with proximally placed thumbs and fifth finger clinodactyly. Activity of the enzyme was virtually zero in lysates of red cells or hair roots, but in intact fibroblasts the level of activity was 7.5% of normal. Kinetic studies also demonstrated differences. A sister of the brothers was, by enzyme assay, heterozygous. One of the affected uncles had advanced tophaceous gout by age 32 years. |Hladnik et al. (2008) reported a family in which 5 individuals carrying the same splice site mutation in the HPRT gene showed marked phenotypic variability resulting from HPRT deficiency. One patient had classic Lesch-Nyhan syndrome with delayed development, spasticity, dystonia, and self-injurious behavior. Two patients had an intermediate phenotype with mild cognitive and learning difficulties, dystonia, and increased uric acid, but no self-injurious behavior, and 2 had mild spasticity, gout, and normal IQ. Hladnik et al. (2008) postulated that each individual had various expression of the mutant and wildtype transcript, and emphasized that individuals with the same genotype may not necessarily have the identical phenotype. |Sarafoglou et al. (2010) reported a 3-generation family in which 3 individuals carrying the same missense mutation in the HPRT1 gene showed phenotypic variability. The proband presented at age 14.5 months with increased uric acid levels and later showed mildly delayed development. His cousin was diagnosed at age 26 months, and had mild generalized hypotonia, delayed motor development, focal dystonia of the lower limbs, and mild developmental impairment with speech delay. The boys' 65-year-old grandfather was more severely affected, with borderline cognitive function, severe dyslexia, spasticity, and flexion contractures leading to motor impairment. He had a long history of gout, nephrolithiasis, and progressive renal dysfunction. Medical history revealed that his symptoms had been attributed to cerebral palsy due to perinatal asphyxia. Enzymatic studies of cultured fibroblasts showed decreased activity in the proband, more severely decreased activity in the cousin, and the most severely decreased activity in the grandfather, consistent with their phenotypes. Cells from the grandfather grew more slowly than those from the grandchildren and appeared less robust. |
614037::Mayatepek and Flock (1998) described the inability to synthesize LTC4, thought to be due to a primary deficiency of LTC4 synthase (LTC4S; 246530), in an infant with a fatal developmental syndrome. The infant presented with muscular hypotonia, psychomotor retardation, failure to thrive, and microcephaly. The course of the disease was rapidly progressive and the infant died at the age of 6 months. The patient was the daughter of consanguineous Turkish parents. |Mayatepek et al. (2000) reported another patient with LTC4S deficiency, a girl born at 33 weeks' gestation to consanguineous Italian parents. She had generalized muscular hypotonia with lack of facial expression from the first day of life. After the first week of life, she developed symmetric extension in the lower extremities, including stretching of the trunk musculature. During the course of the disease, severe muscular hypotonia and failure to thrive with tendency to microcephaly became rapidly progressive. There were no pyramidal tract signs, and deep tendon reflexes were not present. She had no psychomotor development and there was no visual contact at any time. It was impossible to extubate the patient, and the infant died at 6 months of age. |
127750::dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) can be caused by mutation in the alpha-synuclein (SNCA; 163890) or beta-synuclein (SNCB; 602569) genes.|Familial Parkinson disease-1 (PARK1; 168601) is associated with mutation in the SNCA gene.|The epsilon-4 allele of the APOE gene (107741) and the B allele of the CYP2D6 gene (124030), a cytochrome P-450 monooxygenase, have also been implicated in DLB.|A mutation in the prion protein gene (PRNP; see 176640.0017) has been identified in 1 patient with DLB. Some patients with a diagnosis consistent with Lewy body disease or dementia have mutations in the LRRK2 gene (609007), which is associated with Parkinson disease-8 (PARK8; 607060) (Giasson et al., 2006; Ross et al., 2006). |One family with a mutation in the PSEN2 gene (600759.0009), usually associated with Alzheimer disease-4 (AD4; 606889), had clinical and neuropathologic findings consistent with DLB (Piscopo et al., 2008). |Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is a neurodegenerative disorder clinically characterized by dementia and parkinsonism, often with fluctuating cognitive function, visual hallucinations, falls, syncopal episodes, and sensitivity to neuroleptic medication. Pathologically, Lewy bodies are present in a pattern more widespread than usually observed in Parkinson disease (see PD; 168600). Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300)-associated pathology and spongiform changes may also be seen (McKeith et al., 1996; Mizutani, 2000; McKeith et al., 2005). |Ishikawa et al. (1997) reported 2 unrelated families with familial autosomal dominant diffuse Lewy body disease. In family A, 4 patients over 3 generations presented with parkinsonism, vertical ocular limitation, progressive dementia, and delusions or visual hallucinations. Two of the patients developed neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS). Family S had 3 affected members over 3 generations. One was examined in detail and presented with parkinsonism and progressive dementia and later developed NMS. In a member of family S reported by Ishikawa et al. (1997), Ishikawa et al. (2005) identified a mutation in the PSEN1 gene (104311.0032). No mutations were identified in the SNCA gene. The phenotype was an overlap between DLB and Alzheimer disease with spastic paraparesis (607822). |Denson et al. (1997) reported 10 individuals with Lewy body disease in 3 successive generations of 2 closely intermarried families. The phenotype was variable: 4 patients displayed parkinsonian features only, 3 had dementia only, and 3 had combined parkinsonism and dementia. Mean age of onset was 62 years. Linkage studies were inconclusive. |Wakabayashi et al. (1998) described a Japanese family with parkinsonism and later-onset dementia. The proband developed parkinsonism at the age of 61 years, followed by dementia starting when she was 67. Her uncle, who was also her husband, died at the age of 78 years after 7- and 5-year histories of parkinsonism and dementia, respectively. Her 2 sons developed similar parkinsonism at the ages of 39 and 28 years and also suffered later-onset dementia. The apolipoprotein E genotype of the proband, her uncle, and 1 of their sons was E3/4 and that of the other son was E4/4. The authors concluded that this represented autosomal dominant diffuse Lewy body disease. |Ohara et al. (1999) presented a familial case of dementia with Lewy bodies in 3 sibs, born of first-cousin parents, who demonstrated progressive dementia with a progressive language disorder characterized by dysarthria, paraphasia, and difficulty in finding words. The 2 brothers presented with parkinsonism and fluctuating cognition. The sister and one of the brothers also had visual hallucinations. No mutations in the alpha-synuclein gene (SNCA; 163890), the parkin gene (PARK2; 602544), or the ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal esterase L1 gene (UCHL1; 191342) were found. |Graeber and Muller (2003) provided a review of DLB, which they stated is the second most common degenerative dementia after Alzheimer disease. Clinically, DLB differs from Alzheimer disease in that disease symptoms are prone to fluctuate and patients often suffer from visual hallucinations, though short-term memory is relatively preserved. As many as 70% of patients have parkinsonism and up to 50% are sensitive to the extrapyramidal side effects of neuroleptic drugs. Graeber and Muller (2003) suggested that DLB is a complex disorder with both genetic and environmental factors involved in the pathogenesis, as is the case for many common disorders. |Ohtake et al. (2004) reported a patient with DLB and a mutation in the SNCB gene (602569.0002). He presented at age 64 years with a 3-year history of mild dementia and deterioration in his handwriting. He had frontal lobe involvement manifesting as executive and language dysfunction. He later developed depression, motor apraxia, parkinsonism, and audio and visual hallucinations. Neuropathologic examination showed extensive Lewy bodies in the hippocampus, amygdala, and substantia nigra. Several family members were affected or possibly affected in an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. |Khachaturian (1985) performed an autopsy series of elderly individuals with dementia and found that the second most common pathology after the senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles of Alzheimer disease was that of Lewy bodies found in subcortical and cortical regions. Patients with such 'Lewy body dementia' also have a sufficient number of hippocampal and neocortical senile plaques to meet the diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer disease. Hansen et al. (1990) referred to such patients as having the 'Lewy body variant of Alzheimer disease.' The term 'diffuse Lewy body disease' is reserved for patients with brainstem and cortical Lewy bodies but an insufficient number of senile plaques to fulfill the diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer disease. |Wakabayashi et al. (1998) reported that pathologic examination of their 2 patients showed marked neuronal loss with Lewy bodies in the brainstem, pigmented nuclei, and numerous cortical Lewy bodies and ubiquitin-positive hippocampal neurites. Brain examination of 1 patient studied by Ishikawa et al. (1997) showed neuronal loss with gliosis and many Lewy bodies in the cerebral cortex and brainstem. One affected individual from the kindred reported by Denson et al. (1997) showed neuronal loss and gliosis as well as many Lewy bodies throughout the cerebral cortex and brainstem. Neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques were present, but rare. Neuropathology of the proband reported by Ohara et al. (1999) demonstrated numerous Lewy bodies in the cerebral cortex and brain stem, with no neurofibrillary tangles or neuritic plaques. |Obi et al. (2008) reported the neuropathologic findings of a Japanese patient with PD and later-onset dementia who was heterozygous for a duplication of the SNCA gene (163890.0005) (Nishioka et al., 2006). The patient presented with classic levodopa-responsive parkinsonism at age 47. Loss of memory, visual hallucinations, and progressive cognitive decline began at age 60. Brain MRI showed medial temporal lobe atrophy on both sides, and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) showed hypoperfusion of the frontotemporal and occipital lobes. He later became bedridden and died of pneumonia at age 67. Postmortem examination showed mild frontal lobe atrophy and severe depigmentation of the substantia nigra and locus ceruleus. Severe neuronal loss was noted in the substantia nigra, locus ceruleus, dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve, the amygdala, and the CA2/3 of the hippocampus. SNCA-immunostaining revealed multiple Lewy bodies in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and brainstem. The Lewy body-related pathology was graded as diffuse neocortical type based on the pathologic classification of dementia with Lewy bodies. |Diffuse Lewy Body Disease with Gaze Palsy|Lewis and Gawel (1990) and Fearnley et al. (1991) each presented a case report in which a patient (71 and 76 years old) with dementia and parkinsonism also presented with horizontal and vertical supranuclear gaze palsy, prompting an initial diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP; 601104). Pathologic diagnosis in both cases revealed diffuse Lewy body disease with Lewy bodies in areas believed to be associated with gaze control. |De Bruin et al. (1992) reported a 67-year-old man with a family history of parkinsonism who presented with supranuclear gaze palsy and later developed parkinsonism and mental impairment. A diagnosis of PSP was made initially, but postmortem pathologic examination revealed diffuse Lewy body disease with multiple Lewy bodies in the neocortex and brainstem, as well as lesser numbers of neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. |Brett et al. (2002) reported 2 sibs with onset in their 60s of a disorder characterized by parkinsonism, dementia, and visual hallucinations, which progressed to incapacity. One patient exhibited vertical supranuclear gaze palsy, and the other patient could not be tested. Pathologic examination of both cases showed diffuse Lewy body disease, with changes in the posterior commissure, the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus, and the interstitial nucleus of Cajal, areas that subserve vertical gaze. |
608594::congenital generalized lipodystrophy type 1 (CGL1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding 1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate O-acyltransferase-2 (AGPAT2; 603100) on chromosome 9q34.|Congenital generalized lipodystrophy (CGL), or Berardinelli-Seip syndrome, is a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by a near absence of adipose tissue from birth or early infancy and severe insulin resistance. Other clinical and biologic features include acanthosis nigricans, muscular hypertrophy, hepatomegaly, altered glucose tolerance or diabetes mellitus, and hypertriglyceridemia (Garg, 2004). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Congenital Generalized Lipodystrophy,Congenital generalized lipodystrophy type 2 (269700) is caused by mutation in the BSCL2 gene (606158). Congenital generalized lipodystrophy type 3 (612526) is caused by mutation in the CAV1 gene (601047). Congenital generalized lipodystrophy type 4 (613327) is caused by mutation in the PTRF gene (603198).|Congenital generalized lipodystrophy was originally described by Berardinelli (1954) and Seip (1959) as a disorder of metabolism, lipodystrophy, and endocrine abnormalities. Seip (1959) reported affected brother and sister, and suggested diencephalic origin. Lipodystrophic muscular hypertrophy (Senior, 1961) may be the same entity. Reed et al. (1965) reported congenital lipodystrophy with diabetes and acanthosis nigricans. Seip (1971) reviewed published cases. |Hamwi et al. (1966) discussed lipoatrophic diabetes and noted that substances with insulin-antagonizing and fat-mobilizing properties have been found in the urine of affected patients. Mabry and Hollingsworth (1971) presented evidence for abnormal pituitary function with secretion of an abnormal hormone with melanotrophic and growth hormone properties. In 1 case, surgical hypophysectomy was followed by marked improvement. In postmortem examination of a case, Berge et al. (1976) found hypothalamic lesions judged to be of a malformative or hamartomatous nature. The authors pointed out that the Russell emaciation syndrome (Russell, 1951), which does not appear to be mendelian, had been shown to be due to a hypothalamic lesion, usually glioma, and that cerebral gigantism may likewise be of diencephalic origin. |Brunzell et al. (1968) noted that 2 affected sibs had been reported in each of 5 families, and in 4 other families the parents were consanguineous, suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance. Brunzell et al. (1968) reported a family in which 5 of 12 sibs had a combination of congenital generalized lipodystrophy and cystic angiomatosis with progressive incapacitating bone involvement (termed by some as 'Brunzell syndrome'). Two had subcutaneous soft tissue angiomas. The lipodystrophy was accompanied by acanthosis nigricans, large hands and feet, acromegaloid facial features, lipemia, and hepatosplenomegaly, typical of Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy. |Huseman et al. (1978) reported 3 black sibs with congenital lipodystrophy with a severe disturbance in carbohydrate metabolism manifested by increased plasma levels of glucagon and insulin and resistance to exogenous insulin. Huseman et al. (1979) reported 3 sisters with congenital generalized lipodystrophy and cystic angiomatosis of the long bones. One girl had polycystic ovarian disease. Huseman et al. (1979) noted that labial hypertrophy, sexual precocity, and oligomenorrhea had also been described in this disorder (Brunzell et al., 1968). Dorasamy (1980) reported a case of an affected female infant with first-cousin parents. |Van Maldergem et al. (1992) reported a girl, born of an uncle-niece mating, with features characteristic of total lipodystrophy, including absent subcutaneous fat, hyperlipidemia, acanthosis nigricans, facial dysmorphia, and mild mental retardation with an IQ of 50. At the age of 13 years, the girl was found to have large multilocular cysts at the ends of the long bones, particularly the humeri and femora. At the age of 17 years, oligospaniomenorrhea (few and scanty menses) was a complaint, and polycystic ovaries were demonstrated. Insulin resistance was progressive. Van Maldergem et al. (1992) considered Brunzell syndrome, which they suggested includes cystic angiomatosis, to be distinct from Berardinelli-Seip syndrome.|Seip and Trygstad (1996) presented information on several patients with congenital generalized lipodystrophy followed for almost 40 years. They also described a patient with acquired generalized lipodystrophy, a disorder that was first reported by Ziegler (1928) and later by Lawrence (1946), which may represent an autoimmune disorder. In congenital lipodystrophy, insulin resistance is present from birth, resulting in hyperinsulinemia, dyslipidemia, and insulin-resistant diabetes with an anabolic syndrome worsened by a voracious appetite. Growth velocity is increased in preschool age children, and organomegaly is observed with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy that can be lethal in early adulthood. Three patients of Seip and Trygstad (1996) died at the ages of 24, 32, and 37 years. Another, alive at age 39 years, suffered from stenocardia (angina pectoris). Their first patient was born in 1952 of second-cousin parents. She had a healthy twin brother and an affected younger brother. She suffered from severe hyperhidrosis with moist and warm hands, attributable to an increased energy metabolism. Insulin-resistant diabetes (IDDM; 222100) developed at age 12 years and diabetic nephropathy and neuropathy (see 603933) were evident by age 16 years. She died at age 32. The affected brother was 192 cm tall at the age of 17 years. He was married with 3 healthy children. Bjornstad et al. (1996) reported that all patients of Seip and Trygstad (1996) had hypertrophic hearts, mostly with deranged diastolic, but also systolic, function. One had pulmonary hypertension. Conspicuous acanthosis nigricans was illustrated in 2 patients aged 8 and 9 years. One of the patients from a Finnish-derived population of Norway was described as 'not as athletic as the other patients,' and pneumoencephalography showed more extensive changes than in the other patients, with dilatation of both lateral ventricles, the third ventricle, and the basal cisterns. He was somewhat more mentally retarded. He died of heart failure at the age of 35 years. |Uzun et al. (1997) described 3 patients with multiple peripheral pulmonary artery stenoses in association with congenital generalized lipodystrophy. Two were a brother and sister, aged 2 and 6 years, respectively; the third was a 14-year-old girl.|Van Maldergem et al. (2002) studied 70 affected individuals from 44 unrelated families with congenital generalized lipodystrophy. Forty-five patients from 24 families had BSCL2 (269700) and 21 patients from 17 families had BSCL1. Two European families had no BSCL2 mutations and did not show linkage to chromosome 9q34, indicating the existence of an additional locus, which the authors termed BSCLX. All subjects of African ancestry (35%) were in the BSCL1 group. Congenital onset of lipoatrophy occurred in 79.5% of patients with BSCL2 compared to 61% of other cases. Onset of diabetes was the same in all patients. All patients had skeletal muscle hypertrophy, and the prevalence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was approximately 20% in all groups. Seven of 45 (15%) BSCL2 patients died prematurely (range, 4 months to 35 years of age), compared to no premature deaths in patients with BSCL1. The most significant finding was an increased frequency of mild or moderate intellectual impairment in the BSCL2 group (78%) compared to BSCL1 (10%), yielding an odds ratio of 23.5. There was no correlation between site and type of seipin mutation and intellectual impairment. Van Maldergem et al. (2002) concluded that BSCL1 is a milder disease than BSCL2. |Simha and Garg (2003) compared whole-body adipose tissue distribution by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in 10 congenital generalized lipodystrophy patients, of whom 7 (6 females, 1 male) had CGL1 and 3 (2 males, 1 female) had CGL2 (269700). Both subtypes had marked lack of metabolically active adipose tissue located at most subcutaneous, intermuscular, bone marrow, intraabdominal, and intrathoracic regions. Paucity of mechanical adipose tissue in the palms, soles, orbits, scalp, and periarticular regions was noted in CGL2, whereas it was well preserved in CGL1 patients. The authors concluded that congenital generalized lipodystrophy patients with BSCL2 (606158) mutations have a more severe lack of body fat, which affects both metabolically active and mechanical adipose tissue. |Haghighi et al. (2016) compared the clinical features of 5 patients with genetically confirmed CGL1 and 5 with CGL2. All patients had generalized lipodystrophy and muscular hypertrophy, and most had hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. Additional features were found in both groups, but tended to be more frequent in patients with CGL2 than in those with CGL1; these features included acromegaloid appearance, large ears, triangular facies, acanthosis nigricans, increased insulin levels, elevated liver enzymes, hernias, and cardiomyopathy. Genital abnormalities and hypertriglyceridemia were found equally in both groups. Two CGL1 patients and 1 CLG2 patient had nephrolithiasis. Only 1 CGL1 patient had bone cysts, and only CGL2 patients had intellectual disability, hypertrichosis, and high-pitched voice. |
201710::lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia (LCAH) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (STAR; 600617) on chromosome 8p11.|Lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia, the most severe disorder of steroid hormone biosynthesis, is caused by a defect in the conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone, the first step in adrenal and gonadal steroidogenesis. All affected individuals are phenotypic females with a severe salt-losing syndrome that is fatal if not treated in early infancy (summary by Lin et al., 1991 and Bose et al., 1996). |Affected individuals may have a severe deficiency of adrenal or gonadal steroids. All affected individuals are phenotypic females irrespective of gonadal sex, and frequently die in infancy if mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid replacement are not instituted. Only 11 of the first 32 patients described survived infancy (Hauffa et al., 1985), although some treated patients have survived to adulthood (Hauffa et al., 1985; Kirkland et al., 1973). |In the series of 15 patients reported by Bose et al. (1996), 3 were XX females but all had phenotypically normal female genitalia at birth. All patients had normal birth weight and gestational ages. Their plasma corticotropin and renin values were high; serum cortisol and testosterone values varied substantially but responded poorly to corticotropin and chorionic gonadotropin. There were substantial variations in the degree of hyponatremia and hyperkalemia and in the age of onset of symptoms, with 1 child surviving for 6 months without hormonal replacement. At least 5 neonates had hyperglycemia, and at least 5 had respiratory disorders. Bose et al. (1996) noted that both of these features could be caused by glucocorticoid deficiency. At least 12 patients had hyperpigmentation at birth, indicating intrauterine glucocorticoid deficiency, which caused excessive corticotropin secretion. |Fujieda et al. (1997) reported clinical, endocrinologic, and molecular analyses of 2 unrelated Japanese kindreds with 46,XX subjects affected with lipoid CAH who manifested spontaneous puberty. Phenotypic female infants with 46,XX karyotypes were identified as having lipoid CAH as newborns based on a clinical history of failure to thrive, hyperpigmentation, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and low basal values of serum cortisol and urinary 17-hydroxycorticosteroid and 17-ketosteroid. These patients responded to treatment with glucocorticoid and 9-alpha-fludrocortisone. Spontaneous thelarche (breast development) occurred in association with increased serum estradiol levels at the age of 10 and 11 years, respectively. Pubic hair developed at the age of 12 years in one subject, and menarche occurred at the age of 12 years in both cases. Both subjects reported periodic menstrual bleeding and subsequently developed polycystic ovaries. These findings demonstrated that ovarian steroidogenesis can be spared to some extent through puberty when the STAR gene product is inactive. This is in marked contrast to the early onset of severe defects in testicular and adrenocortical steroidogenesis that characterize lipoid CAH. |
616299::lipoyltransferase-1 deficiency (LIPT1D) is caused by compound heterozygous mutation in the LIPT1 gene (610284) on chromosome 2q11.|Soreze et al. (2013) reported a boy, born of unrelated French parents, who presented at age 15 months with delayed psychomotor development and hypotonia. At age 18 months, he had acute metabolic decompensation associated with gastroenteritis. Symptoms included increased serum lactate, metabolic acidosis, abnormal liver enzymes, and psychomotor regression manifest as severe hypotonia, dystonia, loss of head control, and coma. After a few days, he had spastic tetraparesis and extrapyramidal signs as well as inability to speak, but he was otherwise fully conscious and alert. Brain imaging showed cerebellar atrophy, cortical atrophy, bilateral thalamic abnormalities, bifrontal white matter abnormalities, and delayed myelination. The findings were consistent with a clinical diagnosis of Leigh syndrome (256000). Laboratory studies showed increased glutamine and proline and were consistent with decreased activities of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHC) and alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (KGDH), as demonstrated in patient fibroblasts. Branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase (BCKDH) activity was also decreased. Glycine was not increased. Carbon dioxide production by the Krebs cycle and mitochondrial respiratory chain activity were decreased with pyruvate as a substrate compared to controls. |Tort et al. (2014) reported a female infant, born of unrelated parents, who presented with sudden clinical deterioration and bradycardia on the second day of life. She had moderate jaundice, hypoactivity, and weak cry, and a perinatal infection was suspected. Physical examination showed generalized hypertonia and dystonic movements of the hands and feet. She developed pulmonary hypertension and further clinical deterioration, resulting in cardiorespiratory arrest and death at age 9 days. Laboratory studies showed severe lactic acidosis, liver dysfunction, and increased 2-ketoglutarate. There was no evidence of increased glycine. Overall PDHC activity was decreased compared to controls, but partial reactions catalyzed by the E1 (PDHA1, 300502 and PDHB, 179060) and E3 (DLD; 238331) subunits were normal; E2 (DLAT; 608770) activity was not measured, but sequence analysis of DLAT was normal. Muscle samples from the patient showed normal mitochondrial respiratory chain activities. |
603376::Fatty-acid oxidation has a major role in energy production during periods of fasting. When body glucose is depleted, fatty acids are mobilized from adipose tissue, taken up by the liver, and converted to ketone bodies, a major alternative source of energy for peripheral tissues. At the cellular level, after being transported through the cell membrane and then into the mitochondria by means of a carnitine-dependent system, long chain fatty acids are predominantly oxidized in mitochondria. Al Odaib et al. (1998) described 2 unrelated young boys who presented with acute liver failure and were found to have a defect in the transport of long chain fatty acids. In 1 patient, the first episode of hepatic failure occurred at the age of 1 year; there were 7 additional episodes of acute liver failure over the next 4 years, leading to the necessity for orthotopic liver transplantation. The second patient had been in good health until age 4 years when he presented with otitis media, which was treated with amoxicillin, and signs of liver failure with mild encephalopathy. Again, orthotopic liver transplantation was performed. Of particular interest was the absence of fatty infiltration of the liver in these 2 patients, a finding that was initially interpreted as incompatible with an underlying disorder of fatty acid oxidation. In these patients, the failure of extensive biochemical investigations to reveal abnormal levels of metabolites in plasma and urine, together with the finding of abnormal fatty acid oxidation in vitro, raised the suspicion of a defect located upstream of the transport of long chain fatty acids through the mitochondrial membranes. This hypothesis was confirmed by the finding that the oxidation of myristic acid and palmitic acid increased after permeabilization of fibroblast plasma membranes with digitonin, by the correlation between the severity of the defect and the length of the substrate tested, and by the presence of normal uptake of other substrates. After permeabilization of fibroblast membranes, cells from both patients showed oxidation rates similar to or higher than those of normal subjects. For comparison, a cell line from the patient with deficiency of mitochondrial long chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (143450) showed similar rates of palmitate oxidation before and after membrane permeabilization.|Treem et al. (1988) described a disorder involving a defective plasma membrane carnitine transporter, which impaired the uptake of carnitine in kidney, muscle, and skin fibroblasts, but not in liver; see 212140. |
609016::LCHAD deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the gene encoding long-chain hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (HADHA; 600890).Complete mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency (609015) is a less common disorder that is also caused by mutation in the HADHA gene.|Isolated deficiency of long-chain 3-hydroxyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by early-onset cardiomyopathy, hypoglycemia, neuropathy, and pigmentary retinopathy, and sudden death (IJlst et al., 1996). |Wanders et al. (1989) described sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) in a 3-day-old infant caused by deficiency of long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase. Duran et al. (1991) reported that the younger sister of this patient began at the age of 5 months to have feeding problems, lowered consciousness, and liver dysfunction. Plasma long-chain acylcarnitine was increased. A clue to the diagnosis was given by the results of a phenylpropionic acid loading test. On a diet enriched with medium-chain triglycerides, the patient started to thrive, signs of cardiomyopathy disappeared, and her liver function returned to normal. |Rocchiccioli et al. (1990) described an infant with LCHAD deficiency who developed recurrent hypoglycemia in early infancy and died at 9 months of age from a rapidly progressive myopathy and cardiomyopathy. The activities of long-, medium-, and short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenases (609576, 607008 and 606885, respectively) and 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase (607809) were normal. The clinical features of this disorder bore similarities to those of systemic carnitine deficiency (212140) as well as with carnitine-palmitoyl-CoA transferase (255110 and 255120) and long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiencies. The differential diagnosis relies on the demonstration of long-chain urinary dicarboxylic acids with a hydroxyl group in the 3-position and on the study of the enzyme activity in cultured fibroblasts. Rocchiccioli et al. (1990) diagrammed the pathway of fatty acyl-CoA beta-oxidation in mitochondria. |Jackson et al. (1991) described the cases of 2 unrelated children. Recessive inheritance was supported by the finding of intermediate levels of enzyme activity in the fibroblasts from the parents of one of the children. |Bertini et al. (1992) reported the case of an 11-month-old girl with LCHAD deficiency and a new phenotype of sensorimotor polyneuropathy, pigmentary retinopathy, and fatal progressive cardiomyopathy. |Hagenfeldt et al. (1990) described 5 patients with a suspected defect in the beta-oxidation of fatty acids characterized by massive excretion of 3-hydroxydicarboxylic acids in the urine and accumulation of 3-hydroxy fatty acids in serum during acute illness. Long-chain and medium-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenases in fibroblasts were normal in all patients. Death due to cardiomyopathy and liver failure occurred in 4 of the 5 at 3 to 14 months of age. Elder sibs of 2 of the patients had died unexpectedly in early infancy. The parents of 1 of the patients were second cousins. Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase may have been the enzyme deficient in these cases. |Tyni et al. (1997) discussed the clinical presentation of 13 patients with LCHAD deficiency. The patients had hypoglycemia, cardiomyopathy, muscle hypotonia, and hepatomegaly during the first 2 years of life. Recurrent metabolic crises had occurred in 7 patients; the other 6 had a steadily progressive course. Cholestatic liver disease, which is uncommon in beta-oxidation defects, was found in 2 patients. One patient had peripheral neuropathy, and 6 had retinopathy with focal pigmentary aggregations or retinal hypopigmentation. Radiologically, there was bilateral periventricular or focal cortical lesions in 3 patients and brain atrophy in 1. Only 1 patient, who had dietary treatment for 9 years, was alive at the age of 14 years; all others died before they were 2 years of age. The experience indicated the importance of recognizing the clinical features of LCHAD deficiency for the early institution of dietary management, which can alter the otherwise invariably poor prognosis. |Ibdah et al. (1999) reported a patient who presented at 2 months of age with generalized tonic-clonic seizure due to an acute infantile hypocalcemia and vitamin D deficiency. He also had occult, unexplained cholestatic liver disease and impairment of 25-hydroxylation of vitamin D secondary to hepatic steatosis. Sudden unexpected death occurred at 8 months. Molecular analysis identified a homozygous 1528G-C mutation (E510Q; 600890.0001) in the HADHA gene. The mother had preeclampsia during the third trimester of her pregnancy. |In 2 girls, aged 8 and 15 years, with LCHAD deficiency, Schrijver-Wieling et al. (1997) observed extensive macular pigmentary depositions and a 'salt and pepper' scattering of pigment in their retinas. They had decreasing visual acuity. The investigators suggested that testing for LCHAD deficiency should be included in the diagnostic process in children with retinal dystrophy, in particular when other clinical symptoms suggesting this disorder occur. Uusimaa et al. (1997) reported 2 unrelated boys with pigmentary retinopathy in association with a mild clinical presentation of LCHAD deficiency. |Tyni et al. (2002) noted that pigmentary retinopathy is an important feature of LCHAD deficiency. In studies in cultured porcine retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells, they presented strong in vitro evidence for the presence of mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation in RPE cells and the expression of the MTP in the RPE and other layers of the retina. |Sewell et al. (1994) stated that most reported cases were diagnosed at the age of several months and presented with fasting-induced hypoketotic hypoglycemia and muscular hypotonia. Thiel et al. (1999) reported a patient presenting 20 hours after birth with signs of tachypnea, hypotonia, and mild retractions, and Carpenter and Wilcken (1999) described a patient who developed hypoglycemia at birth; on dietary treatment, both patients remained well. |Although the mortality rate among children with deficiency of LCHAD or complete deficiency of the trifunctional protein had been reported to be 75 to 90%, Ibdah et al. (1999) found that 67% of the affected children in their study were alive and receiving dietary treatment at the most recent follow-up, and most were able to attend school. Dietary treatment of children with fatty-acid oxidation disorders dramatically reduces morbidity and mortality. |Van Hove et al. (2000) reviewed the acylcarnitines in plasma and blood spots of patients with LCHAD deficiency. Long-chain 3-hydroxyacylcarnitines of C14:1, C14, C16, and C18:1 chain length, and long-chain acylcarnitines of C12, C14:1, C14, C16, C18:2, and C18:1 chain length were elevated. Acetylcarnitine was decreased. In plasma, elevation of hydroxy-C18:1 acylcarnitine over the 95th centile of controls, in combination with an elevation of 2 of the 3 acylcarnitines C14, C14:1, and hydroxy-C16, identified over 85% of patients with high specificity (less the 0.1% false-positive rate). High endogenous levels of long-chain acylcarnitines in normal erythrocytes reduced the diagnostic specificity in blood spots compared with plasma samples. The results were diagnostic in the asymptomatic patients. Treatment with a diet low in fat and high in medium-chain triglyceride decreased all disease-specific acylcarnitines, often to normal, suggesting that this assay is useful in treatment monitoring. |Fryburg et al. (1994) suggested that LCHAD deficiency is responsible for the lipid myopathy in Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome (see 158350), an autosomal dominant condition of macrocephaly in combination with lipomas/hemangiomas and developmental delay. |Wilcken et al. (1993) and Treem et al. (1994) noted that isolated LCHAD deficiency in children may be associated with severe maternal illness occurring during pregnancies with affected fetuses. These maternal illnesses include the acute fatty liver pregnancy (AFLP) syndrome; hypertension or hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets (HELLP) syndrome; and hyperemesis gravidum. The AFLP syndrome is characterized by anorexia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and jaundice in the third trimester. Fulminant liver failure and death may occur. HELLP syndrome is more common and may represent the severe end of the spectrum of preeclampsia. In both syndromes, microvesicular fatty infiltration of maternal liver occurs, a pathologic picture similar to that in children with fatty acid oxidation defects. Thus, AFLP and HELLP are genetic disorders due to a primary defect in the fetus. |Ibdah et al. (1999) stated that little is known about the mechanism of the association between isolated deficiency of LCHAD in a fetus with the common 1528G-C mutation (600890.0001) on at least one allele and liver disease in the mother during the pregnancy. They hypothesized that in the presence of the 1528G-C mutation, long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl metabolites produced by the fetus or placenta accumulate in the mother and are highly toxic to the liver; this reaction is perhaps exaggerated by the decreased metabolic utilization of fatty acids during pregnancy. |Ibdah et al. (2001) performed molecular prenatal diagnosis in 9 pregnancies, 8 in 6 families with isolated LCHAD deficiency and 1 in a family with complete trifunctional protein deficiency. Analyses were performed on chorionic villus samples in 7 pregnancies and on amniocytes in 2. Molecular prenatal diagnosis successfully identified the fetal genotype in all 9 pregnancies. Two fetuses were affected, and the pregnancies were terminated. Two other fetuses had normal genotype and 5 others were heterozygotes. All 7 pregnancies were uncomplicated and all the offspring were liveborn and healthy. Ibdah et al. (2001) concluded that women heterozygous for trifunctional protein alpha-subunit mutations who carry fetuses with wildtype or heterozygous genotypes have uncomplicated pregnancies. |
211980::mutations in several genes are associated with lung cancer. Both germline and somatic mutations have been identified in the EGFR (131550) and p53 (TP53; 191170) genes, and somatic mutations have been identified in the KRAS (190070), BRAF (164757), ERBB2 (164870), MET (164860), STK11 (602216), PIK3CA (171834), and PARK2 (602544) genes. Amplification of several genes, including EGFR, ERBB2, MET, PIK3CA, and NKX2-1 (600635), is also associated with lung cancer. Deletion of several genes, including DOK2 (604977), is also associated with lung cancer. An ALK/EML4 fusion gene (see 105590) has been identified in lung cancer. Several polymorphisms are associated with lung cancer susceptibility, including a 5-prime SNP in the ERCC6 gene (609413) and SNPs in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor gene cluster on chromosome 15q25.1 (see LNCR2; 612052). Lung cancer susceptibility loci have been mapped to chromosome 6q23-q25 (LNCR1; 608935), 5p15 (LNCR3; 612571), 6p21 (LNCR4; 612593), and 3q28 (LNCR5; 614210). Deletion alleles in the CYP2A6 (122720) and CASP8 (601763) genes are associated with a reduced risk of lung cancer in Japanese and Han Chinese individuals, respectively. A SNP in the MPO gene (606989) is associated with reduced risk of lung cancer in smokers.|Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in the U.S. and worldwide. The 2 major forms of lung cancer are nonsmall cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer (see 182280), which account for 85% and 15% of all lung cancers, respectively. Nonsmall cell lung cancer can be divided into 3 major histologic subtypes: squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and large cell lung cancer. Cigarette smoking causes all types of lung cancer, but it is most strongly linked with small cell lung cancer and squamous cell carcinoma. Adenocarcinoma is the most common type in patients who have never smoked. Nonsmall cell lung cancer is often diagnosed at an advanced stage and has a poor prognosis (summary by Herbst et al., 2008). |Joishy et al. (1977) described identical twins who developed symptoms of alveolar cell carcinoma almost simultaneously. |Ahrendt et al. (2001) noted that incidence rates for squamous cell and small cell lung carcinoma began falling among males in the mid-1980s, but a decline in the incidence of primary adenocarcinoma of the lung among males was not observed until 5 to 10 years later. Similarly, although the incidence rates of squamous cell, large cell, and small cell lung carcinoma among women leveled off or started to decrease, the incidence of adenocarcinoma continued to increase. With these changes in the incidence among the different histologic types of lung carcinoma over the 1990s, adenocarcinoma of the lung became the most common type of lung carcinoma in the U.S. (Wingo et al., 1999). |
222700::lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the amino acid transporter gene SLC7A7 (603593) on chromosome 14q11.|Lysinuric protein intolerance is caused by defective cationic amino acid (CAA) transport at the basolateral membrane of epithelial cells in kidney and intestine. Metabolic derangement is characterized by increased renal excretion of CAA, reduced CAA absorption from intestine, and orotic aciduria (Borsani et al., 1999). |See also dibasic amino aciduria I (222690).|Perheentupa and Visakorpi (1965) first described 3 Finnish infants with an inborn error of metabolism characterized by protein intolerance and deficient transport of basic amino acids. Blood urea was low and urinary lysine and arginine were increased. |Kekomaki et al. (1967) described 10 children, including several pairs of sibs, with vomiting, diarrhea, failure to thrive, hepatomegaly, diffuse cirrhosis, low blood urea, hyperammonemia, and leukopenia. Symptoms were aggravated by high protein intake and relieved by protein restriction. An excess of ornithine, arginine, and lysine, but not of cystine, was excreted in the urine. Intestinal absorption of arginine and lysine was normal. A low concentration of arginine relative to lysine in body fluids was thought responsible for the hyperammonemia and reduced urea synthesis. One of the families was consanguineous. |Kekomaki et al. (1968) reported a 23-year-old man with protein intolerance who refused to eat protein-rich food. Institution of cow's milk at age 1 year resulted in prolonged watery diarrhea and retardation of physical development. He grew physically with increased protein intake in his teens, but mental function deteriorated and he had episodic attacks of stupor and asterixis. The liver was enlarged and fatty. His 15-year-old affected sister also had protein intolerance. |Oyanagi et al. (1970) described severe mental retardation, physical retardation, mild intestinal malabsorption syndrome, and increased urinary excretion of lysine, ornithine, and arginine in 2 Japanese sisters with second-cousin parents. Cystine excretion was always within normal limits. |Malmquist et al. (1971) stated that 13 cases of familial protein intolerance had been observed in Finland. They described a Swedish patient of Finnish origin with intellectual impairment, radiographic evidence of brain atrophy, and marked skeletal fragility. Administration of alanine resulted in elevation of blood ammonia and glucose. Urea cycle function appeared to be normal and the defect was thought to concern the mechanisms by which amino nitrogen is transferred to the urea-synthesizing system. |During citrulline infusion, Rajantie et al. (1981) found that LPI patients had increased plasma citrulline levels similar to controls, but excessive excretion compared to controls. Patients had subnormal increases in plasma arginine and ornithine with massive argininuria and moderate ornithinuria. The excretion rates of the third diamino acid lysine and other amino acids remained practically unaltered, thus excluding mutual competition as the cause for the increases. The results suggested that reabsorption in the normal kidney involves partial conversion of citrulline to arginine and ornithine, and that the diamino acid transport defect in LPI is located at the basolateral cell membrane of the renal tubules. This inhibits the efflux of arginine and ornithine, increasing their cellular concentration, which in turn inhibits the metabolic disposal of citrulline, and causes leakage of arginine, ornithine, and citrulline into the tubular lumen. |Carpenter et al. (1985) emphasized that childhood osteopenia and osteoporosis were nearly constant complications of lysinuric protein intolerance. Laboratory studies suggested defective transport of ornithine and arginine across the plasma membrane of liver cells and across the basolateral membrane of renotubular cells. The defect in transport of dibasic amino acids results in lack of sufficient ornithine to support activity of hepatic ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC; 300461). Episodic hyperammonemia occurs, similar to that observed in OTC deficiency (311250). |Shaw et al. (1989) described a 36-year-old man and his 32-year-old brother who presented in adult life with hyperammonemic coma due to lysinuric protein intolerance. They were of normal intellect and had maintained good health, until presentation in their thirties, by unconscious dietary protein avoidance. |Parto et al. (1994) described the clinical courses and autopsy findings of 4 pediatric LPI patients. All had developed acute respiratory insufficiency. In addition to pulmonary hemorrhages, 3 of them had pulmonary alveolar proteinosis and 1 had cholesterol granulomas. Three patients had clinically obvious renal insufficiency, but all 4 showed histologic signs of immune complex-mediated glomerulonephritis. The patients also developed hepatic insufficiency with fatty degeneration or cirrhosis. All patients showed anemia, thrombocytopenia, and a severe bleeding tendency. Bone marrow of 3 patients was hypercellular, but the number of megakaryocytes was decreased in 2 cases. Amyloid was present in the lymph nodes and spleen. Bone specimens showed osteoporosis. Parto et al. (1994) concluded that in addition to being at risk of protein malnutrition in the active growth phase, probably due to higher requirements for total nitrogen and amino acids, pediatric patients with lysinuric protein intolerance are predisposed to develop pulmonary alveolar proteinosis and glomerulonephritis. |McManus et al. (1996) reported a 21-year-old woman who had presented at 8 months of age with persistent vomiting and failure to thrive. At that time there was a marked increase in urinary lysine excretion and ornithine and arginine to a lesser extent. The urinary orotic acid concentration was also raised and casein protein loading tests increased the concentrations of all plasma amino acids except lysine, ornithine, and arginine. A protein-restricted diet was recommended and supplements of lysine, arginine, and citrulline were prescribed. During the teenage years, compliance with the diet and amino acid supplements was poor, and she developed osteoporosis. She showed gradual deterioration with episodic disturbances of liver function and hyperammonemia 2 years before her death. Immediately before death she became comatose, had persistently raised serum ammonia concentrations, metabolic acidosis, and a coagulopathy. She died despite intensive therapy, including intravenous arginine for the hyperammonemia. Postmortem examination revealed hepatic micronodular cirrhosis with extensive fatty changes. The lungs showed pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. Immunofluorescence and electron microscopy revealed glomerulonephritis with predominant IgA deposition. McManus et al. (1996) suggested that the glomerulopathy may have been related to the failure of the normal role of the liver in clearance of immune complexes from the circulation. Pulmonary hemorrhage and alveolar proteinosis had also been previously described in Finnish cases. |In a 3-year-old boy of Norwegian descent with LPI and immune complex disease consistent with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; 152700), Parsons et al. (1996) presented evidence suggesting that the immune complex disease may be the basis of the respiratory problems. |In 4 patients with LPI, Duval et al. (1999) found features that fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HPLH1; 267700). Mature histiocytes and neutrophil precursors participated in hemophagocytosis in the bone marrow. Serum levels of ferritin and lactate dehydrogenase were elevated, hypercytokinemia was present, and soluble interleukin-2 receptor levels were increased up to 18.6-fold. Duval et al. (1999) suggested that the diagnosis of LPI should be considered in any patient presenting with hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. |
608516::multiple genetic loci are involved in the causation of this complex trait.|One susceptibility locus for major depressive disorder (MDD1; 608520) has been mapped to chromosome 12q22-q23.2. Another susceptibility locus for major depressive disorder (MDD2; 608691) has been mapped to 15q25.3-q26.2.|Polymorphism in the FKBP5 gene (602623), which plays a role in the stress hormone-regulating hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, has been found to be related to a faster response to antidepressant drug treatment and to increased recurrence of depressive episodes.|A mutation in the tryptophan hydroxylase-2 gene (TPH2; 607478), which encodes the rate-limiting enzyme of neuronal serotonin synthesis and maps to 12q21, was found in individuals with unipolar major depression.|A polymorphism in the HTR2A gene (182135.0003), which encodes the serotonin 2A receptor, has been associated with citalopram treatment outcome in major depressive disorder.|According to the DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000), major depressive disorder is characterized by one or more major depressive episodes without a history of manic, mixed, or hypomanic episodes. A major depressive episode is characterized by at least 2 weeks during which there is a new onset or clear worsening of either depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure in nearly all activities. Four additional symptoms must also be present including changes in appetite, weight, sleep, and psychomotor activity; decreased energy; feelings of worthlessness or guilt; difficulty thinking, concentrating, or making decisions; or recurrent thoughts of death or suicidal ideation, plans, or attempts. The episode must be accompanied by distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.|Major depressive disorder is commonly recurrent and can be lethal. Up to 15% of individuals with severe major depressive disorder die by suicide. There is a 4-fold increase in death rate of individuals with major depressive disorder over 55 years of age (American Psychiatric Association, 2000).|
248310::For general information on malaria and the influence of genetic factors on malaria susceptibility, progression, severity, and resistance, see 611162.|(A number sign (#) is used with this entry because variation in several different genes influences susceptibility and resistance to malaria, as well as disease progression and severity. These genes include HBB (141900), ICAM1 (147840), CD36 (173510), CR1 (120620), GYPA (617922), GYPB (617923), GYPC (110750), TNF (191160), NOS2A (163730), TIRAP (606252), FCGR2B (604590), and CISH (602441). In addition, a locus associated with Plasmodium falciparum blood infection level has been mapped to chromosome 5q31-q33 (PFBI; 248310), a locus for susceptibility to mild malaria has been mapped to chromosome 6p21.3 (MALS; 609148), a locus associated with malaria fever episodes has been mapped to chromosome 10p15 (PFFE1; 611384), and a locus for susceptibility to placental malarial infection has been mapped to chromosome 6 (FUT9; 606865). Complete protection from Plasmodium vivax infection is associated with the Duffy blood group-negative phenotype (see 110700). Alpha(+)-thalassemia (141800), the X-linked disorder G6PD deficiency (300908), and Southeast Asian ovalocytosis (166900) are associated with resistance to malaria.Malaria, a major cause of child mortality worldwide, is caused by mosquito-borne hematoprotozoan parasites of the genus Plasmodium. Of the 4 species that infect humans, P. falciparum causes the most severe forms of malaria and is the major cause of death and disease. Although less fatal, P. malariae, P. ovale, and, in particular, P. vivax infections are major causes of morbidity. The parasite cycle involves a first stage in liver cells and a subsequent stage at erythrocytes, when malaria symptoms occur. A wide spectrum of phenotypes are observed, from asymptomatic infection to mild disease, including fever and mild anemia, to severe disease, including cerebral malaria, profound anemia, and respiratory distress. Genetic factors influence the response to infection, as well as disease progression and severity. Malaria is the strongest known selective pressure in the recent history of the human genome, and it is the evolutionary driving force behind sickle-cell disease (603903), thalassemia (see 141800), glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency (300908), and other erythrocyte defects that together constitute the most common mendelian diseases of humans (Kwiatkowski, 2005; Campino et al., 2006). )|
248360::malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the MLYCD gene (606761) on chromosome 16q23.|Malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency is an uncommon inherited metabolic disease. The characteristic phenotype is variable, but may include developmental delay in early childhood, seizures, hypotonia, diarrhea, vomiting, metabolic acidosis, hypoglycemia, ketosis, abnormal urinary compounds, lactic acidemia, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Sweetman and Williams, 2001).|Brown et al. (1984) described deficiency of malonyl-CoA decarboxylase in a 5-year-old boy who had been studied for short stature, abdominal pain, chronic constipation, episodic vomiting, and metabolic acidosis. Abnormal amounts of malonic, methylmalonic, and succinic acids were found in his urine. The parents were first cousins, and a sib had died at 3.5 months of age. The mitochondrial malonyl-CoA decarboxylase was very deficient and both parents had an intermediate level of activity. |Haan et al. (1986) reported a second boy with more severe malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency who presented in a quite different way from the previous patient and whose urine contained, in addition to the above-mentioned organic acids, adipic, glutaric, and suberic acids. The child was mildly mentally retarded and presented with vomiting, seizures, hypoglycemia, and mild metabolic acidosis during a urinary tract infection. Mitochondrial malonyl-CoA decarboxylase activity in fibroblasts was 4% of normal; in both parents it was about half normal. |MacPhee et al. (1993) described 2 patients, a son of second-cousin Irish parents and a girl, the daughter of first-cousin Scottish parents. They were investigated during episodes of vomiting and febrile convulsions associated with concomitant developmental delay. Malonicaciduria and grossly reduced malonyl-CoA decarboxylase activity were demonstrated. |FitzPatrick et al. (1999) provided an analysis of the 7 reported cases of MCD deficiency. The condition was present in early childhood and was associated with malonicaciduria, methylmalonicaciduria, and developmental delay in all 7, seizure disorder and hypoglycemia in 4, and cardiomyopathy in 2. |De Wit et al. (2006) reported a 4.5-year-old girl, born of consanguineous Moroccan parents, with MCD deficiency. Family history revealed 2 neonatal deaths and several miscarriages. The patient had feeding problems, failure to thrive, and severe developmental delay with no language development. Diagnosis occurred at age 2 years when metabolic screening showed compensated metabolic acidosis, hyperammonemia, increased malonic acid, and other abnormalities. Skin fibroblasts showed complete MCD deficiency. Cardiac exam was normal. The patient also had a very poor appetite. Brain MRI showed generalized atrophy, major white matter loss, thickened cortex with pachygyria, and periventricular nodular heterotopia. These findings were consistent with a malformation of cortical development. A review of the literature found that some previously reported patients also had brain imaging abnormalities, such as frontotemporal atrophy and white matter changes. |
248600::maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) can be caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in at least 3 genes: BCKDHA (608348) on chromosome 19q13, BCKDHB (248611) on chromosome 6q14, and DBT (248610) on chromosome 1p21. These genes encode 2 of the catalytic components of the branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase complex (BCKDC), which catalyzes the catabolism of the branched-chain amino acids, leucine, isoleucine, and valine.|Mutation in the third component, E3 (DLD; 238331), on chromosome 7q31, causes an overlapping but more severe phenotype known as DLD deficiency (DLDD; 246900). DLD deficiency is sometimes referred to as MSUD3.|The major clinical features of maple syrup urine disease are mental and physical retardation, feeding problems, and a maple syrup odor to the urine. The keto acids of the branched-chain amino acids are present in the urine, resulting from a block in oxidative decarboxylation. There are 5 clinical subtypes of MSUD: the 'classic' neonatal severe form, an 'intermediate' form, an 'intermittent' form, a 'thiamine-responsive' form, and an 'E3-deficient with lactic acidosis' form (246900). All of these subtypes can be caused by mutations in any of the 4 genes mentioned above, except for the E3-deficient form, which is caused only by mutation in the E3 gene (Chuang and Shih, 2001).|Menkes et al. (1954) reported a familial syndrome in which 4 sibs had progressive infantile cerebral dysfunction associated with an unusual urinary substance. Onset was in the first week of life, with death by 3 months of age. The urine had an odor resembling maple syrup. Referring to the syndrome as 'maple syrup urine disease,' Westall et al. (1957) found that the levels of branched-chain amino acids, leucine, isoleucine, and valine, were greatly elevated. Menkes (1959) isolated and identified the corresponding keto acids in the urine of affected patients, suggesting that the catabolic pathways of the branched-chain amino acids were blocked at the decarboxylation step. Dancis et al. (1960) also referred to the disorder as 'branched-chain ketoaciduria.' |In classic MSUD, which is the most common form of the disorder, 50% or more of the keto acids are derived from leucine, and the activity of the BCKD complex is less than 2% of normal. Affected newborns appear normal at birth, with symptoms developing between 4 and 7 days of age. The infants show lethargy, weight loss, metabolic derangement, and progressive neurologic signs of altering hypotonia and hypertonia, reflecting a severe encephalopathy. Seizures and coma usually occur, followed by death if untreated (Chuang and Shih, 2001).|Wong et al. (1972) reported a case of classic MSUD. DiGeorge et al. (1982) made important observations on the course of classic MSUD in the first 4 days of life when an affected child was on a diet devoid of branched-chain amino acids. Although the branched-chain amino acids were normal in cord blood, serum leucine was significantly elevated by 4 to 14 hours of age and rose progressively thereafter, permitting an accurate and early diagnosis. However, Shih (1984) emphasized that classic MSUD may be missed in newborn screening because of slow rise of blood leucine levels. |Frezal et al. (1985) observed a family in which 2 different forms of MSUD occurred in the same family. The proposita had an acute neonatal form; 2 of her sisters had an almost asymptomatic form which the authors thought represented compound heterozygosity for the classic mutant and a partial variant. The proband did not respond to thiamine. |Kaplan et al. (1989) described psychometric testing on 9 girls and 7 boys with MSUD. They concluded that prospective or early treatment significantly improves the intellectual outcome and that poor biochemical control may adversely affect performance.|Van Calcar et al. (1992) described a 25-year-old woman with classic MSUD who was diagnosed at the age of 11 days and was successfully treated with dietary restrictions. She was followed closely during a pregnancy, with delivery of a healthy baby whose length and weight were at the 5th centile.|Schulman et al. (1970) first described intermediate MSUD in a 19-month-old patient who was being evaluated for mental retardation. She had normal physical growth but severe developmental delay. She had mild systemic acidosis and markedly increased levels of plasma branched-chain amino acids and urinary branched-chain keto acids. Protein restriction was effective, but thiamine administration was not. The patient had 15 to 25% residual BCKD activity in leukocytes and fibroblasts. Kalyanaraman et al. (1972) reported 2 patients with the intermediate form of MSUD manifesting as hyperkinetic behavior and mental retardation. |Chhabria et al. (1979) reported a neonate who presented with ophthalmoplegia and was later found to have intermediate MSUD with residual BCKD complex activity. They noted that 2 similar cases with MSUD and ophthalmoplegia had previously been reported. |Gonzalez-Rios et al. (1985) reported a boy with intermediate MSUD who presented at age 10 months in ketoacidotic coma, with a history of irritability, poor feeding, and growth and developmental delay. branched chain amino acid restriction resulted in normal growth and development by age 42 months, but thiamine was not effective. The authors determined that the defect was in the catalytic activity of the E1 component of the BCKD complex, but there was some residual enzyme activity. |Schadewaldt et al. (2001) determined whole-body L-leucine oxidation in MSUD patients. In 4 patients with classic MSUD, L-leucine oxidation was too low to be measurable. In 2 females with a severe variant form of the disease, L-leucine oxidation was about 4% of control. In 6 milder variants, including intermediates, the estimates for residual whole-body L-leucine oxidation ranged from 19 to 86% (59 +/- 24%) of control, and were substantially higher than the residual branched-chain 2-oxo acid dehydrogenase complex activities in the patients' fibroblasts (10 to 25% of control). |Morris et al. (1961) reported a 24-month-old female with intermittent MSUD. She was asymptomatic until age 16 months when she had recurrent episodic ataxia, lethargy, semicoma, and elevated urinary branched-chain keto acids following otitis media. Similarly, her younger brother was normal until about age 10 months when he had an acute episode. Dietary protein restriction was effective (see also Morris et al., 1966). |In 2 sibs of each of 2 families, Dancis et al. (1967) observed intermittent MSUD. The children suffered from a transient neurologic disorder associated with elevation of branched-chain amino acids and keto acids in the urine as well as a distinctive odor to the urine. One sib of each family died during an attack. Late onset of symptoms and clinical normality between attacks differentiated the condition from classic MSUD. In addition, the level of leukocyte BCKD complex activity seemed to be higher than in the classic form of the disease. |Two Norwegian families with the intermittent form were described by Goedde et al. (1970). They noted that in the intermittent form, only 1 parent shows decreased enzyme activity. Van der Horst and Wadman (1971) described an intermittent form with severe episodes of acidosis with mental retardation that was partially reversed on dietary therapy. Other cases of intermittent MSUD were reported by Kiil and Rokkones (1964), Valman et al. (1973), and Indo et al. (1988). |Scriver et al. (1971) described a variant of MSUD in which the hyperaminoacidemia was completely corrected by thiamine hydrochloride (10 mg per day) with dietary restriction (see also Scriver et al., 1985). Duran et al. (1978) and Duran and Wadman (1985) reported successful treatment of MSUD with thiamine administration.|Chuang et al. (1982) found that BCKDH complex activity in thiamine-responsive MSUD is about 30 to 40% the normal rate. Further studies showed that the primary defect in thiamine-responsive MSUD is reduced affinity of the mutant BCKD for thiamine pyrophosphate. |In 2 cases of MSUD responsive to thiamine administration, Zhang et al. (1990) found that the sequence of the gene for the E1-alpha subunit was normal. The result was considered consistent with any of the following possibilities: that the thiamine-binding site involves the E1-beta subunit, that the binding site is on E1-alpha, but a mutation elsewhere in the complex alters the affinity of the thiamine-binding site by an allosteric interaction, or that the clinical response to thiamine is due to stabilization of the enzyme that has a mutation in either the E1-beta or the E2 protein. |In a report from Tunisia, Monastiri et al. (1997) noted that since maple syrup is largely unknown by Mediterranean populations, the odor of the urine in MSUD is more reminiscent of fenugreek (Trigonella foenum graecum L.) than of maple syrup. Fenugreek beans are traditionally used by Mediterranean populations as an infusion for sick persons (Boukef et al., 1982), and its fragrant smell is disagreeable and well known in that area. Monastiri et al. (1997) suggested that physicians in Mediterranean countries should keep in mind that a fenugreek odor of urine with neurologic distress in newborn infants, without a history of fenugreek ingestion by the mother of the baby, should raise a suspicion of MSUD. |Sewell et al. (1999) described a case of 'pseudo-maple syrup urine disease' caused by drinking fenugreek tea. The 5-week-old Egyptian infant had a 10-minute episode of unconsciousness while drinking bottled tea. He recovered spontaneously, but the parents nevertheless sought medical attention. On examination, the child was found to exude an aroma similar to that of Maggi (a widely available flavoring), and a spontaneously voided urine sample had a similar aroma. The parents indicated that the child had been given herbal tea (Helba tea) to reduce flatulence and prevent fever. This tea contains seeds of fenugreek. Analysis of the infant's urine revealed the presence of sotolone, the compound responsible for the aroma in maple syrup urine disease (Podebrad et al., 1999). Tea prepared from fenugreek seeds was found to contain sotolone. Bartley et al. (1981) had reported a similar case. Since herbal teas are popular as home remedies, particularly in Middle Eastern countries, physicians should use caution when they are presented with young infants from such countries, to avoid unnecessary and costly investigations. |
154800::some cases of cutaneous mastocytosis (MASTC) are caused by heterozygous germline mutation in the KIT gene (164920) on chromosome 4q12. Systemic mastocytosis and some cases of cutaneous mastocytosis are caused by somatic mutation in the KIT gene.|Mastocytosis, or mast cell disease, is a heterogeneous group of clinical disorders characterized by the abnormal accumulation of mast cells in various tissues, especially in the skin and hematopoietic organs. Mastocytosis usually appears in infancy or early adulthood. In most pediatric cases, the disease is limited to the skin, but it can be associated with systemic symptoms due to the release of mediators from mast cells, even when there is no systemic infiltration. It usually has a good prognosis, with substantial improvement or spontaneous resolution before puberty. In rare cases, the disease may remain active through adolescence as a systemic adult mastocytosis. Cutaneous mastocytosis is characterized by macules, papules, nodules, or diffuse infiltration of the skin, often associated with localized hyperpigmentation. Gentle rubbing of the lesions induces histamine release from mechanically activated mast cells, causing local wheals, erythema, and often pruritus, a phenomenon termed the 'Darier sign.' In contrast to childhood-onset mastocytosis, adult-onset mastocytosis often persists for the lifetime of the patient and is also more likely to be a severe and systemic disease involving numerous organs. In some cases, it is associated with a clonal hematologic non-mast-cell lineage disease, such as a myelodysplastic or myeloproliferative disorder. Adult-onset mastocytosis can also lead to the rare mast cell leukemia, which carries a high risk of mortality (summary by Bodemer et al., 2010 and Kambe et al., 2010). |Burgoon et al. (1968) observed cutaneous mastocytosis in association with diffuse infiltration of mast cells in other organs in a father and daughter and an unrelated girl. |Bazex et al. (1971) reviewed 35 families reported between 1891 and 1971. Fowler et al. (1986) added 14 further families. |Oku et al. (1990) described bullous mastocytosis in a mother and 2 daughters and a son. The appearance of the mast cells differed in the adult from that in the children, and improvement in the clinical features occurred spontaneously over time. |Clark et al. (1990) described urticaria pigmentosa in a sister and brother and in their maternal grandfather who had a daughter (aunt of the sibs) who had histologically diagnosed urticaria pigmentosa. An unusual feature was the marked diversity of the skin disease: classic lesions, telangiectasia macularis eruptiva perstans, and clinically normal skin with positive dermal infiltrates of excess mast cells. |Anstey et al. (1991) described a woman and her daughter who both developed diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis in early infancy. Mast-cell granules in both cases were found on electron microscopy to have an abnormal ultrastructure. Similar giant granules had been noted in familial cases by James and Eady (1981). |Longley et al. (1996) studied a patient who had aggressive systemic mastocytosis with massive splenic involvement who first noted the pigmented macules of urticaria pigmentosa on his thighs at age 40. The lesions were initially asymptomatic, but over the next 2 years the lesions progressively involved his trunk and upper limbs and the diagnosis of cutaneous mastocytosis was made. He required antihistamines for pruritus, and at age 42, splenomegaly was first noted. The following year mild anemia developed, paratrabecular mast cell infiltrates with fibrosis and eosinophils were identified in his bone marrow, and he required a gluten-free diet and type I and II histamine receptor antagonists to control cramps and diarrhea. Because of hematologic hypersplenism with the progressively enlarging spleen and his need to travel to remote areas, he successfully underwent elective splenectomy at age 47 with concurrent biopsies of liver, mesenteric lymph nodes, and skin, all of which showed infiltration by mast cells. |Pignon et al. (1997) reported a 44-year-old man who presented with a 2-month history of asthenia, gastric pain, and flushes. He was found to have moderate splenomegaly. Although there were no circulating mast cells, bone marrow aspirates showed 40% abnormal mast cells, often arranged in clusters. Despite chemotherapy followed by a familial HLA-matched bone marrow transplant that appeared to achieve engraftment, the patient relapsed 4 months later and died from massive multivisceral involvement of the mastocytosis. |Tang et al. (2004) studied a family in which 5 individuals over 3 generations had diffuse cutaneous mastocytosis. The proband developed generalized pruritus and blistering on the scalp at 4 months of age, and at 9 months exhibited dermatographism on his trunk. He had intermittent groups of blisters on the scalp and posterior trunk, and a single yellow-brown papule on his arm, similar in appearance to a solitary mastocytoma, that remained unchanged over 2 years. He had no cutaneous pigmentary abnormalities or organomegaly. Biopsy of both clinically normal and involved skin revealed a dense infiltrate of mature mast cells in the upper dermis. His father also had developed blisters on his trunk and scalp at age 4 months, which resolved by 2 years of age. His skin remained itchy, dry, and diffusely thickened with ill-defined flexural pigmentation. At age 25, he had appendicitis, at which time he was found to have mast cell infiltration of the appendix and bone marrow. Since that time he had no further hematologic or gastrointestinal symptoms. The proband's paternal uncle, paternal grandfather, and a paternal great aunt were also diagnosed with cutaneous mastocytosis in infancy, presenting with blistering of the trunk and scalp; they had diffuse cutaneous thickening and pigmentation of flexural areas associated with dermatographism, but no evidence of systemic involvement. None of the affected family members was known to have a gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST; 606764). |Zhang et al. (2006) described a mother and daughter with mastocytosis. The mother, who had an undiagnosed childhood skin complaint, presented at age 26 years with hepatosplenomegaly, ichthyotic skin, and dermatographism. Bone marrow examination confirmed a diagnosis of mastocytosis, which was designated 'smoldering systemic mastocytosis' according to the WHO classification for mast cell disorders. Five years later she underwent splenectomy for abdominal pain, and she had progressive hepatomegaly with extensive necrosis, fibrosis, and mast cell infiltration. Her daughter presented at age 16 years with lichenified skin and a history of blistering and weals on minor trauma in infancy, blotchy skin on exposure to cold, and raised red-brown discoid maculopapular lesions over her neck and back since age 8 years. Skin biopsy was consistent with urticaria pigmentosa. She did not develop organomegaly during more than a decade of follow-up; thus her diagnosis remained cutaneous mastocytosis. The daughter gave birth to a son who had unusual skin symptoms since birth, with rashes and blistering, but he had not been evaluated for mast cell disease. |Wasag et al. (2011) reported a Polish father and 2 children who exhibited urticaria pigmentosa as the only manifestation of mastocytosis. The 33-year-old father had mildly itchy skin lesions on his trunk and lower extremities from early childhood. He had no other symptoms and chest x-ray and abdominal ultrasound showed no abnormalities. His 5-year-old daughter and 1-year-old son had similar skin lesions present since infancy, without systemic symptoms or any food intolerance or allergy. Skin biopsy confirmed the clinical diagnosis of urticaria pigmentosa in all 3 patients, and bone marrow analysis in the father was negative for mastocytosis. Over a 3-year follow-up period, none of the affected family members showed any symptoms of mastocytosis other than urticaria pigmentosa. |
125851::the maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 2 (MODY2) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the GCK gene (138079) on chromosome 7p13.|MODY is a form of NIDDM (125853) characterized by monogenic autosomal dominant transmission and early age of onset. For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of MODY, see 606391.|In a review of the various forms of MODY, Fajans et al. (2001) stated that glucokinase-related MODY2 is a common form of the disorder, especially in children with mild hyperglycemia and in women with gestational diabetes and a family history of diabetes. It has been described in persons of all racial and ethnic groups. More than 130 MODY-associated mutations have been found in the glucokinase gene. Heterozygous mutations in glucokinase are associated with a mild form of nonprogressive hyperglycemia that is usually asymptomatic at diagnosis and is treated with diet alone. The mild fasting hyperglycemia with blood glucose concentrations of 110 to 145 mg/deciliter and impaired glucose tolerance in most affected carriers may be recognized by biochemical testing at a young age, possibly as early as birth. About 50% of the women who are carriers may have gestational diabetes. Less than 50% of the carriers have overt diabetes; many of those who do are obese or elderly. Two percent of MODY2 patients require insulin therapy. Diabetes-associated complications are rare in this form of MODY. MODY was found in 13% of the Caucasian NIDDM families collected in France by Froguel et al. (1991). Gidh-Jain et al. (1993) found that GCK mutations accounted for 56% of MODY families in France. |
155140::Lajarrige et al. (1989) described a family in which the grandfather died in the course of surgical intervention for perforated Meckel diverticulum. The father of the proband was operated on at the age of 14 years for perforation of a Meckel diverticulum that contained heterotrophic gastric mucosa. The proband, born in 1980, complained of recurrent abdominal pain that was incompletely relieved by aluminum hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide. Although scans using technetium 99 were negative, surgery was undertaken because of the family history. A Meckel diverticulum containing mucosa resembling that of the gastric fundus was found. |
201450::medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase gene (ACADM; 607008) on chromosome 1p31.|Inherited deficiency of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase is characterized by intolerance to prolonged fasting, recurrent episodes of hypoglycemic coma with medium-chain dicarboxylic aciduria, impaired ketogenesis, and low plasma and tissue carnitine levels. The disorder may be severe, and even fatal, in young patients (Matsubara et al., 1986). |Gregersen et al. (1976) first described MCADH deficiency in a patient who presented with unexplained episodes of lethargy and unconsciousness and C6-C10 dicarboxylic aciduria. Naylor et al. (1978) studied 2 early-adolescent sisters who suffered from intermittent hypoglycemia, lethargy, and coma associated with peripheral lobular fatty changes in the liver. During hypoglycemia, massive C6-C14 dicarboxylic aciduria was demonstrated by gas chromatography. Adipic and monounsaturated sebacic, seburic, ozeleic acids were among those elevated in urine and serum. The workers suggested that because of a defect in beta-oxidation of fatty acids of medium chain length, omega oxidation to dicarboxylic acids had occurred through an alternative pathway. Probably identical cases have been reported, although not in full detail. |Colle et al. (1983) reported 2 children with reversible episodes of hypoglycemia and 'Reye syndrome' who during the acute phases showed urinary excretion of dicarboxylic acids and psi-hydroxy fatty acids. Rhead et al. (1983) measured defective medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase in one of the patients of Colle et al. (1983), thus supporting the findings of Kolvraa et al. (1982) and Divry et al. (1983) that acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency can be responsible for dicarboxylic aciduria. |In a Finnish family, Rasanen et al. (1971) reported 2 sibs with hepatic steatosis (228100). Studies of a subsequently born affected sib showed changes consistent with nonketotic C6-C10-dicarboxylic aciduria (Simila et al., 1984). Stanley et al. (1983) reported 3 children in 2 families who presented in early childhood with episodes of illness associated with fasting and resembling Reye syndrome: coma, hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, and fatty liver. Deficiency of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase was demonstrated. The authors concluded that the carnitine deficiency was a secondary phenomenon and suggested that other patients with 'systemic carnitine deficiency' (see 212140) who fail to respond to carnitine therapy may have defects in fatty acid oxidation of this type.|Roe et al. (1986) identified this defect in mitochondrial beta-oxidation in 2 asymptomatic sibs in a family in which 2 previous infant deaths had occurred: one attributed to sudden infant death syndrome and one to Reye syndrome. Recognition of MCAD deficiency in one of these infants and in a surviving sib was accomplished by detection of octanoylcarnitine. |Matsubara et al. (1986) stated that at least 24 cases of MCADH deficiency had been reported. Taubman et al. (1987) diagnosed MCADH deficiency in a 20-month-old girl with a history of 2 sibs who died of an encephalopathy diagnosed as Reye syndrome. |
261100::hereditary megaloblastic anemia-1 can be caused by mutation in the gene encoding cubilin (CUBN; 602997) or the AMN (605799) gene.|The CUBN and AMN gene products form a complex that acts as a receptor for vitamin B12 and gastric intrinsic factor (GIF; 609342).|Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome was described by Imerslund (1960) in Norway and Grasbeck et al. (1960) in Finland; the Finnish cases were found to be due to mutations in cubilin, whereas the Norwegian cases were found to be due to mutations in AMN. |Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome is a form of congenital megaloblastic anemia due to vitamin B12 deficiency caused by a defect in the vitamin B12/intrinsic factor receptor. See also congenital pernicious anemia due to a defect in intrinsic factor (261000).|Adult pernicious anemia (170900) is a distinct autoimmune disorder associated with plasma autoantibodies to gastric parietal cells or gastric intrinsic factor. In these cases, there is gastric atrophy and a relatively high frequency of associated thyroiditis and myxedema.|Waters and Murphy (1963) reported 3 affected brothers. Both parents and 5 other sibs had subnormal or borderline vitamin B12 absorption. See also Lambert et al. (1961). Mollin et al. (1955) reported juvenile pernicious anemia in the offspring of a first-cousin marriage. The father developed classic pernicious anemia in middle age. These may have been cases of congenital pernicious anemia due to a defect in intrinsic factor (261000). |Grasbeck (1960) described pernicious anemia in association with proteinuria. Whereas a defect in production of intrinsic factor was postulated by the authors cited above, Grasbeck (1960) favored a selective defect in intestinal absorption of vitamin B12 in this disorder which was uninfluenced by administration of intrinsic factor. Proteinuria and malformation of the urinary tract were also present. |Imerslund and Bjornstad (1963) and Lamy et al. (1961) reported on the syndrome of chronic relapsing megaloblastic anemia and permanent proteinuria. |Mohamed et al. (1966) reported sisters with selective malabsorption of vitamin B12 with adequate gastric secretion of functionally competent intrinsic factor and hydrochloric acid. Persistent proteinuria appears to be an integral part of the syndrome (Mohamed et al., 1966). The latter authors gave a genetic analysis of published cases. |In the oldest known patient, Goldberg and Fudenberg (1968) found normal amounts of biologically active intrinsic factor in the gastric juice and found neither antibodies to intrinsic factor nor inhibitors of intrinsic factor. The mechanism of defective absorption was unknown. MacKenzie et al. (1972) studied 3 brothers and found no morphologic abnormality of the ileal mucosa. There seems to be no defect in ileal receptors for the complex between intrinsic factor and B12; the defect appears to be located between the attachment of B12 to the surface of the ileal cell and the binding to transcobalamin II. On the other hand, Burman et al. (1985) described absence of functional receptor. It was inferred that there may be more than one nonallelic form of this disorder--a not surprising finding in light of the complexity of cobalamin absorption. |In 1972 Grasbeck stated that 47 cases were known, of which 21 had been diagnosed in Finland. Nevanlinna (1980) stated that in Finland 27 cases in 17 sibships had been identified. Spurling et al. (1964) described 2 Baltimore sisters with this syndrome who had proteinuria. Their parents were fourth cousins. Urban et al. (1981) described 3 cases from 2 families with congenital B12 malabsorption without proteinuria. The defect in intestinal absorption may have been partial. Broch et al. (1984) described a long-term follow-up on 14 patients, aged 6 to 46 years at the time of report. Those with proteinuria in childhood continued to excrete protein (an average of 750 mg/24 hrs), but it seemed that no progression of the renal lesion had occurred. |Lin et al. (1994) described 2 affected brothers in a Chinese family. An unusual feature was widespread mottled skin pigmentation, termed poikiloderma, which, unlike the hyperpigmentation sometimes seen with vitamin B12 deficiency, did not respond to treatment. The skin changes in these young adults had been present since the age of 3 or 4 years. |Al Essa et al. (1998) described 2 Saudi sisters with this disorder. In children, early anemia usually leads to the diagnosis. In this case, however, the presence of hemoglobinopathy that required frequent transfusions masked the usual macrocytosis, and the older sister was not diagnosed until the age of 12 years when neurologic changes became apparent. Dementia and paralysis responded remarkably to treatment, despite the late diagnosis. |Rossler et al. (2003) reported a Lebanese family in which 2 sisters and their 2 first cousins all had Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome without proteinuria. All presented with classic symptoms of anemia between age 6 and 11 years, and all responded well to treatment with cobalamin. In 2 patients, Schilling test showed 18 to 27% ileal uptake of intrinsic factor/cobalamin, consistent with partial function. Partial function of cobalamin uptake may explain the absence of proteinuria in affected members of this family. |
155600::Malignant melanoma is a neoplasm of pigment-producing cells called melanocytes that occurs most often in the skin, but may also occur in the eyes, ears, gastrointestinal tract, leptomeninges, and oral and genital mucous membranes (summary by Habif, 2010).|Genetic Heterogeneity of Susceptibility to Cutaneous Malignant Melanoma|The locus for susceptibility to familial cutaneous malignant melanoma-1 (CMM1) has been mapped to chromosome 1p36. Other CMM susceptibility loci include CMM2 (155601), caused by variation in the CDKN2A gene (600160) on chromosome 9p21; CMM3 (609048), caused by variation in the CDK4 gene (123829) on chromosome 12q14; CMM4 (608035), mapped to chromosome 1p22; CMM5 (613099), caused by variation in the MC1R gene (155555) on chromosome 16q24; CMM6 (613972), caused by variation in the XRCC3 gene (600675) on chromosome 14q32; CMM7 (612263), mapped to chromosome 20q11; CMM8 (614456), caused by variation in the MITF gene (156845) on chromosome 3p13; CMM9 (615134), caused by variation in the TERT gene (187270) on chromosome 5p15; and CMM10 (615848), caused by mutation in the POT1 gene (606478) on chromosome 7q31.|Somatic mutations causing malignant melanoma have also been identified in several genes, including BRAF (164757), STK11 (602216), PTEN (601728), TRRAP (603015), DCC (120470), GRIN2A (138253), ZNF831, BAP1 (603089), and RASA2 (601589). A large percentage of melanomas (40-60%) carry an activating somatic mutation in the BRAF gene, most often V600E (164757.0001) (Davies et al., 2002; Pollock et al., 2003). |Several writers (e.g., Moschella, 1961; Schoch, 1963; Salamon et al., 1963) commented on the usual fair complexion, blue eyes, and multiple ephelides in patients with familial melanoma. |In a questionnaire study, Kopf et al. (1986) found that a positive family history for melanoma was correlated with a younger age at first diagnosis in the proband, a smaller diameter of the lesion, lower Clark level, decreased frequency of nonmelanoma skin cancer, and reduced prevalence of noncutaneous cancer. (The Clark index refers to the level of invasion.) A comparison of monozygotic and dizygotic twins for melanoma might be important because of cases of melanoma in non-blood-related members of the same household (Robinson and Manheimer, 1972). |Lynch et al. (1978) suggested that a cutaneous marker indicative of susceptibility to malignant melanoma is characterized by large moles, variable in number, reddish brown to pink in color, and with an irregular border. Histologically, they show a bizarre intraepidermal pattern. The authors also described a melanoma family with distinctive freckling and dryness of the skin, suggesting xeroderma pigmentosum (278700) but with normal unscheduled DNA repair and a dominant pedigree pattern. Other malignancies such as colon cancer had an increased frequency in these families. |Clark et al. (1978), Greene et al. (1978), and Reimer et al. (1978) pointed out distinctive clinical and histologic features of the moles that are precursors of familial malignant melanomas. They termed these features the 'B-K mole syndrome' after the family names of 2 patients; later, Greene et al. (1980) and Elder et al. (1980) expressed a preference for the designation 'hereditary dysplastic nevus syndrome.' The same lesion underlies some cases of nonfamilial malignant melanoma. Greene et al. (1980) referred to this as 'dysplastic nevus syndrome, sporadic type.' The clinical features include between 10 and 100 moles on the upper trunk and limbs, and variability of mole size (from 5 to 15 mm), outline, and color. Histologically, B-K moles show atypical melanocytic hyperplasia, lymphocytic infiltration, delicate fibroplasia, and new blood vessel formation. Lynch et al. (1980) referred to this as FAMMM (familial atypical mole--malignant melanoma syndrome). Arndt (1984) and Greene et al. (1985) provided photographic illustration of the familial dysplastic nevus syndrome. |Lynch et al. (1980) studied 3 kindreds of the FAMMM syndrome. Father-to-son transmission was observed. One patient had 9 separate primary melanomas in 18 years. Expressivity was highly variable. Management is difficult because one cannot be certain which moles require biopsy and then, following histologic study, which require wide excision. The possibility of increased risk of cancer at other sites was raised. Hartley et al. (1987) described several cases of malignant melanoma in close relatives of children with osteosarcoma (259500) and chondrosarcoma (215300). They proposed that in certain families malignant melanoma may be a manifestation of the same gene defect that results in susceptibility to tumors characteristic of the SBLA syndrome (151623). |Tucker et al. (2002) described the clinical and histologic features of dysplastic nevi and melanoma over time in families at an increased risk of melanoma with differing germline mutations in CDKN2A (600160) and CDK4 (123829). They evaluated clinically and followed prospectively for up to 25 years a total of 33 families with more than 2 living members with invasive melanoma. A total of 844 family members were examined and photographed. All the families were found to have members with dysplastic nevi and melanoma; 17 had mutations in CDKN2A, 2 had mutations in CDK4, and 14 had no mutations in either gene identified. Most of the dysplastic nevi either remained stable or regressed; few changed in a manner that should have caused concern for melanoma. The melanomas and dysplastic nevi that were found to occur in the study families did not appear to vary by the type of mutation identified in the families. |Melanoma-associated retinopathy is a form of paraneoplastic visual disorder that can occur in individuals who have metastatic cutaneous malignant melanoma. Alexander et al. (2004) found that the overall pattern of contrast sensitivity loss shown by patients with melanoma-associated retinopathy was consistent with the dysfunction at the level of the retinal bipolar cells presumed to underlie the disorder. |
309400::Menkes disease is caused by mutation in the gene encoding Cu(2+)-transporting ATPase, alpha polypeptide (ATP7A; 300011). The occipital horn syndrome (304150) is caused by mutation in the same gene.|Menkes disease is an X-linked recessive disorder characterized by generalized copper deficiency. The clinical features result from the dysfunction of several copper-dependent enzymes.|De Bie et al. (2007) provided a detailed review of the molecular pathogenesis of Menkes disease. |In a family of English-Irish descent living in New York, Menkes et al. (1962) described an X-linked recessive disorder characterized by early retardation in growth, peculiar hair, and focal cerebral and cerebellar degeneration. Severe neurologic impairment began within a month or two of birth and progressed rapidly to decerebration. Five males were affected but the gene could by inference be identified in 4 generations. The failure to grow brought the affected infants to medical attention at the age of a few weeks and death occurred in the first or second year of life. The hair was stubby and white. Microscopically it showed twisting, varying diameter along the length of the shaft, and often fractures of the shaft at regular intervals. Rather extensive biochemical investigations showed elevated plasma glutamic acid as the only consistent abnormality. The anatomic change in the central nervous system was described on the basis of 2 autopsies. |Bray (1965) observed 2 brothers who died as infants with spastic dementia, seizures, and defective hair. Blood and urine amino acids were normal. Whether this is the same disorder as that in Menkes' family was unclear. The condition described by Yoshida et al. (1964) may have been the same. French and Sherard (1967) presented evidence that they interpreted as indicating that this disorder may represent an abnormality of lipid metabolism. Their 16-month-old patient showed: (1) scant, whitish, lackluster, kinky hair that microscopically showed pili torti, monilethrix and trichorrhexis nodosa; (2) retarded growth; (3) micrognathia and highly arched palate; (4) decline in mental development; (5) onset of focal and generalized seizures; and (6) spastic quadriparesis with clenched fists, opisthotonos, and scissoring. Biochemical studies showed depressed serum tocopherol and normal amino acid content of hair serum and urine. An abnormal autofluorescence is displayed by hair and by Purkinje cells' axons. |Kinky hair disease' proved a designation useful in detection of new cases, since the hair change is an easily remembered feature by which physicians can be alerted to the condition (O'Brien, 1968). Changes in the metaphyses of the long bones and tortuosity of cerebral arteries have been described. Hypothermia and acute illness with septicemia were modes of presentation. Patchy abnormality of systemic arteries with stenosis or obliteration was observed by Danks et al. (1971). They also observed toluidine-blue-metachromasia of fibroblasts. Wesenberg et al. (1969) pointed out that the fetal hair does not show pili torti. |Goka et al. (1976) found that cultured fibroblasts have a concentration of copper over 5 times that of normal fibroblasts. Williams et al. (1978) described the cellular pathology of Menkes disease. |Osaka et al. (1977) reported 2 Japanese families. They pointed out that the hair may not be abnormal, that serum copper determination is a simple and reliable diagnostic test, and that 'congenital hypocupraemia' may be a preferred designation. An abnormality in egress of copper from Menkes disease fibroblasts was suggested by studies of Chan et al. (1978). Defective metallothionein (see 156530) was suggested. |Haas et al. (1981) reported an X-linked disorder of copper metabolism which, by my interpretation, may be an allelic variant of Menkes syndrome. The disorder affected 4 males in 3 sibships connected through females. Similarities to Menkes disease were X-linked recessive inheritance, marked psychomotor retardation with seizures, low serum copper and ceruloplasmin (117700) levels, and a block in gut copper absorption. Differences from Menkes disease included normal birth weight, no hypothermia, grossly and microscopically normal hair, and radiographically normal bones. Survivorship was much longer than in Menkes disease. The neurologic disorder was static and characterized by hypotonia and choreoathetosis. |Tonnesen et al. (1991) reviewed the cases of atypical Menkes reported by Haas et al. (1981). No pili torti were found in one case and very few (2 in 1,000) in a second. In addition, low levels of copper and ceruloplasmin in the serum were puzzling findings. However, (64)Cu uptake and retention was significantly increased in the range seen for classic Menkes patients, and copper uptake in female relatives gave the same uptake pattern as in heterozygotes in other families with the classic disorder.|Godwin-Austen et al. (1978) described a disorder clinically reminiscent of Wilson disease but without Kayser-Fleischer rings. Symptoms began at age 12 years and defective copper absorption from the distal intestine, with high copper levels in rectal mucosa, was demonstrated. X-linked inheritance was suggested. |Proud et al. (1996) reported on the clinical features of 4 affected persons in 3 generations of a family that manifested an unusual variant of the Menkes syndrome. These patients had normal head circumference, moderate to severe mental retardation, onset at age of 3 to 4 years, dysarthria, laxity of skin, bladder diverticula, tortuous vessels, chronic diarrhea, and occipital exostoses (evident in 3 persons aged 18 to 38 years). Study of the MNK gene showed an A-to-T change at the +3 position of the splice donor site near the 3-prime end of the MNK coding sequence resulting in abnormal splicing (Kaler et al., 1994). The authors proposed that maintenance of 20% of normal splicing could explain unique phenotypic manifestations in affected persons. Proud et al. (1996) suggested that these patients, as well as a patient with occipital horn syndrome reported by Wakai et al. (1993), represent a new variant of Menkes syndrome. Phenotypic overlap between Menkes syndrome and the occipital horn syndrome (304150) is to be expected since both are caused by mutations in the ATP7A gene (300011). |Gerard-Blanluet et al. (2004) described occipital horns in a classic case of Menkes disease caused by an 8-bp deletion in the ATP7A gene (300011.0011). They pointed out that 'occipital horn' refers to a wedge-shaped calcification that forms within the tendinous insertions of the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscles at their attachment to the occipital bone. They suggested that presence of voluntary traction on these hyperlax tendons attached to the skull could then have provoked calcification of the occipital tendons as an aberrant way of reparation. Gerard-Blanluet et al. (2004) suggested that voluntary traction of the relevant muscles persisting after 2 years of age, needing both sustained voluntary head control and long survival, is required for the development of occipital horns in patients with Menkes disease caused by a deleterious mutation in the ATP7A gene. |Jankov et al. (1998) described a newborn male who presented with acute onset of severe intraabdominal bleeding, hemorrhagic shock, and multiple fractures leading to death on day 27. Menkes disease was diagnosed at autopsy and confirmed by copper accumulation studies on cultured fibroblasts. Such an early onset of fatal complications in Menkes disease had not previously been reported. The mutation in this case was said to have been identical to that found in an unrelated male with Menkes disease who died at the age of 4 years without severe connective tissue disease. Horn (1999) reported that the mutation in ATP7A was arg980 to ter (300011.0005). |Tumer and Horn (1997) reviewed the clinical and genetic aspects of Menkes syndrome, including phenotypic expression in females, mutation spectrum, diagnosis, and treatment. They also discussed the mottled mouse as a model for Menkes syndrome and new insights into normal and defective copper metabolism provided by biochemical and genetic studies of Menkes syndrome and Wilson disease (277900). |Smpokou et al. (2015) reported 3 unrelated girls who presented in infancy with clinical features of Menkes disease. Features were somewhat variable, but included hypotonia, myopathic facies, coarse hair, silvery hair, skin and joint laxity, and severe global developmental delay. All had cerebrovascular tortuosity and brain or cerebellar atrophy. Two patients had seizures. Serum copper levels were decreased in 2 patients and low-normal in the third patient. Two patients were treated with copper without a clear benefit to cognitive development, although 1 of the patients who received treatment did not develop seizures. The report indicated that females with Menkes disease can have significant manifestations of the disorder. |
609313::mental retardation, enteropathy, deafness, peripheral neuropathy, ichthyosis, and keratoderma (MEDNIK) is caused by homozygous mutation in the AP1S1 gene (603531) on chromosome 7q22.|MEDNIK is a severe multisystem disorder characterized by mental retardation, enteropathy, deafness, peripheral neuropathy, ichthyosis, and keratoderma. It shows phenotypic similarities to CEDNIK (609528) (summary by Montpetit et al., 2008). |Erythrokeratodermia variabilis (EKV; 133200) is a congenital disorder of the skin that causes hyperkeratosis and red patches of variable sizes, shapes, and duration. In 5 children from 3 families originating from the Kamouraska region of the province of Quebec, Saba et al. (2005) described an atypical form of erythrokeratodermia variabilis, designated erythrokeratodermia variabilis-3 (Kamouraska type) and symbolized EKV3. This form was similar to a disorder previously described by Beare et al. (1972) and included sensorineural deafness, peripheral neuropathy, and psychomotor retardation; however, in addition to these symptoms, the Kamouraska patients had congenital diarrhea, an elevation of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs), and a recessive mode of inheritance. Two of the children died at an early age from severe congenital diarrhea. |Montpetit et al. (2008) restudied the patients reported by Saba et al. (2005) and identified another family from Quebec with the disorder. Features included high forehead with upslanting palpebral fissures, congenital sensorineural deafness, psychomotor retardation and mental retardation, peripheral neuropathy, hypotonia, and ichthyosiform erythroderma. Gastrointestinal problems included severe diarrhea, resulting in death in infancy in 4 patients, hepatic fibrosis, cirrhosis, and cholestasis. Two patients had cataracts. |
616878::recurrent metabolic encephalomyopathic crises associated with rhabdomyolysis, cardiac arrhythmias, and neurodegeneration (MECRCN) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the TANGO2 gene (616830) on chromosome 22q11.|Lalani et al. (2016) studied 12 affected individuals from 9 families with episodic rhabdomyolysis, hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, and susceptibility to cardiac tachyarrhythmias. Acute rhabdomyolysis was the presentation in 10 of the 12 patients, with onset between 5 months and 8 years of age. Neurodevelopmental problems were observed in all affected individuals by early childhood, and muscle weakness, gait abnormality, or poor coordination were reported in most patients prior to the acute presentation of myoglobinuria. Seizures were present in 9 of 12 patients. The acute clinical presentation ranged from profound muscle weakness, ataxia, and/or disorientation to a comatose state, frequently precipitated by an acute illness. During these metabolic crises, hypoglycemia, hyperlactacidemia, and mild hyperammonemia were repeatedly observed. Elevated transaminases were also noted, indicative of muscle injury. Acylcarnitine profiles during acute episodes showed elevated C14:1 in at least 3 patients; another patient had elevated C10 species during the acute episode, and another showed elevated C3 (propionyl-carnitine) and C10 species. Life-threatening cardiac tachyarrhythmia presented as torsade de pointes or ventricular tachycardia in 4 (33%) of 12 patients, and intermittent prolonged QTc interval was seen in 6 (50%) of patients. The QT interval often reverted to normal between episodes, and metabolic abnormalities typically normalized outside the critical period of crises. Mitochondrial studies and muscle biopsies were essentially normal. Structural brain abnormalities, seen in 7 of 10 patients who underwent imaging, mostly reflected varying degrees of cerebral atrophy or volume loss. Gait disturbances, dysarthria, and myopathic facies were observed in most patients outside the crisis episodes. Hypothyroidism was diagnosed in 4 of 12 patients. In 1 family, affected twins from a dichorionic diamniotic pregnancy died at 2 years of age, the boy during an episode of hypoglycemia and lactic acidemia, and the girl due to worsening cardiomyopathy. In another family, 1 sib from an affected monozygotic twin pair died at 7 years of age during an acute rhabdomyolytic crisis, whereas his twin brother was alive at 11 years of age. The oldest living patient in the study cohort was 27. |Kremer et al. (2016) reported 3 unrelated individuals with recurrent encephalomyopathic crises characterized by hypoglycemia, elevated plasma creatine kinase activity, lactic acidosis, and increased acylcarnitines, as well as massive urinary excretion of lactate, ketones, and dicarboxylic acids. Prior to the first crisis, global developmental delay as well as cortical signs were observed. Although the clinical condition stabilized between episodes, the overall disease course was one of neurodegeneration, including epilepsy, cognitive impairment, pyramidal and cerebellar signs, and loss of expressive language. Optic atrophy and sensorineural hearing impairment were each seen in 1 patient. Cardiac involvement, with severe arrhythmias including torsade de pointes and long QT syndrome, was a consistent and potentially life-threatening condition. Increased TSH levels indicating hypothyroidism were documented in all 3 patients. |
605552::A clustering of abdominal obesity, high triglycerides, low levels of high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDLC), high blood pressure, and elevated fasting glucose levels is sometimes called metabolic syndrome X (Reaven, 1988) or abdominal obesity-metabolic syndrome (Bjorntorp, 1991). The syndrome may affect nearly 1 in 4 U.S. adults and is considered a veritable epidemic (Ford et al., 2002). It is a major risk factor for both diabetes mellitus (see 125853 and Haffner et al., 1992) and cardiovascular disease (Isomaa et al., 2001). The etiology is complex, determined by the interplay of both genetic and environmental factors. The prevalence varies substantially among ethnic groups, with the highest rates in Mexican American women (Park et al., 2003). Other factors influencing the metabolic syndrome include age, smoking, alcohol, diet, and physical inactivity. |Genetic Heterogeneity of Abdominal Obesity-Metabolic Syndrome|AOMS2 (605572) has been mapped to chromosome 17p12. AOMS3 (615812) is caused by mutation in the DYRK1B gene (604556) on chromosome 19q13.|
250100::metachromatic leukodystrophy (MLD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the arylsulfatase A gene (ARSA; 607574) on chromosome 22q13.|The metachromatic leukodystrophies comprise several allelic disorders. Kihara (1982) recognized 5 allelic forms of MLD: late infantile, juvenile, and adult forms, partial cerebroside sulfate deficiency, and pseudoarylsulfatase A deficiency; and 2 nonallelic forms: metachromatic leukodystrophy due to saposin B deficiency (249900) and multiple sulfatase deficiency or juvenile sulfatidosis (272200), a disorder that combines features of a mucopolysaccharidosis with those of metachromatic leukodystrophy. |This condition was described by Greenfield (1933). In the late infantile form, onset is usually in the second year of life and death occurs before 5 years in most. Clinical features are motor symptoms, rigidity, mental deterioration, and sometimes convulsions. Early development is normal but onset occurs before 30 months of age. The cerebrospinal fluid contains elevated protein. Galactosphingosulfatides that are strongly metachromatic, doubly refractile in polarized light, and pink with PAS are found in excess in the white matter of the central nervous system, in the kidney, and in the urinary sediment (Austin, 1960). |Masters et al. (1964) described 4 cases in 2 families. Progressive physical and mental deterioration began a few months after birth. Megacolon with attacks of abdominal distention was observed. Sufficient difference from the usual cases existed for the authors to suggest that more than one entity is encompassed by metachromatic leukodystrophy. A curious feature of later bedridden stages of the disease was marked genu recurvatum. The first manifestations, appearing before the second birthday, included hypotonia, muscle weakness and unsteady gait, thus suggesting a myopathy or neuropathy. |Gustavson and Hagberg (1971) described 13 cases of late infantile MLD from 11 families. Two pairs of families were related to each other and 3 sets of parents were consanguineous, suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance. |Lyon et al. (1961) described affected brothers with onset at 7 and 4 years of age and with marked elevation of protein in the cerebrospinal fluid. Schutta et al. (1966) recognized a juvenile form of metachromatic leukodystrophy with onset between ages 4 and 10 years, as compared with the more frequent late infantile form with onset between ages 12 and 24 months. |Moser (1972) suggested that juvenile cases of MLD, especially those of late juvenile onset, should be classed with the adult form. An alternative possibility was that some of these cases with phenotype intermediate between those of the late infantile and adult forms represented genetic compounds. The same very low levels of arylsulfatase A were found in the infantile, juvenile, and adult forms, and the reason for the differences in age of onset was unknown.|Von Figura et al. (1986) pointed out that the late-onset form of MLD is a heterogeneous group in which symptoms may develop at any age beyond 3 years. The age of demarcation of juvenile forms from adult forms is somewhat arbitrarily set at age 16 by some and age 21 by others. In the late-onset forms the disease progresses more slowly, and in mild cases the diagnosis may even go unsuspected during life. |In the adult form of metachromatic leukodystrophy, initial symptoms, which begin after age 16, are usually psychiatric and may lead to a diagnosis of schizophrenia. Disorders of movement and posture appear late. Differences from the late infantile form also include ability to demonstrate metachromatic material in paraffin- or celloidin-embedded sections and probably greater sulfatide excess in the gray than in the white matter in the adult form. The gallbladder is usually nonfunctional. Betts et al. (1968) described a man who was 28 when admitted to a psychiatric hospital for 'acute schizophrenia' and 35 when he died of bronchopneumonia. Muller et al. (1969) and Pilz and Muller (1969) described 2 unrelated women with this disorder. Affected sibs were recorded by Austin et al. (1968), among others. |Kihara et al. (1982) found partial cerebroside sulfatase deficiency (10-20% of normal activity in cultured fibroblasts) as the cause of neuropathy and myopathy since infancy in a 37-year-old white female. She had been institutionalized since age 16 for mental retardation. Waltz et al. (1987) described a 38-year-old man who had been diagnosed as schizophrenic and was treated for that condition for many years. The diagnosis of adult MLD was suspected because of white matter abnormalities detected by CT and MRI scanning of the brain; this diagnosis was confirmed by discovery of markedly reduced leukocyte arylsulfatase A activity. The man held a master's degree in physical education and worked full-time as a high school physical education teacher. Personality changes were first noted at about age 31. |Propping et al. (1986) studied consecutive admissions to a state psychiatric hospital and a group of inpatients with chronic psychiatric disorders. The data showed a slight preponderance in the lower levels of arylsulfatase A in leukocytes. Kohn et al. (1988) found no neurologic or EEG changes in MLD heterozygotes but found deficits in the neuropsychologic tests involving spatial or constructional components (but not in tests involving language skills). Tay-Sachs heterozygotes (272800) showed no consistent deficit in any component of the neurologic or neuropsychologic tests.|Marcao et al. (2005) reported a woman with adult-onset MLD confirmed by genetic analysis. She presented at age 37 years with dysfunctional and bizarre behavior, including progressive apathy, loss of interest in daily living routines and caring for her 3 children, and memory disturbances. She had no clinical signs of neuropathy, although MRI showed subcortical brain atrophy and periventricular white matter changes. Nerve conduction velocities were normal; sural nerve biopsy findings were consistent with a slowly progressive demyelinating neuropathy. Despite the relatively mild clinical phenotype, ARSA activity was less than 1% of control values. |Austin et al. (1964) determined that the defect in MLD involves the lysosomal enzyme arylsulfatase A. Since the metachromatic material is cerebroside sulfate, MLD is a sulfatide lipidosis. Stumpf and Austin (1971) presented evidence suggesting that the abnormality in arylsulfatase A is quantitatively and qualitatively different in the late infantile and juvenile forms of metachromatic leukodystrophy. Percy and Kaback (1971) found no difference in enzyme levels between the infantile and adult-onset types, and concluded that some other factor must account for the difference in age of onset. |Porter et al. (1971) corrected the metabolic defect in cultured fibroblasts by addition of arylsulfatase A to the medium. They found that cultured fibroblasts from late-onset metachromatic leukodystrophy hydrolyzed appreciable amounts of exogenous cerebroside sulfate, whereas fibroblasts from patients with the early-onset form hydrolyzed none. Studies of cell-free preparations showed no cerebroside sulfatase activity. Percy et al. (1977) found that cultured skin fibroblasts from the adult-onset patients, although clearly abnormal, were able to catabolize sulfatide significantly more effectively than cultured skin fibroblasts from late infantile patients. |By the technique of isoelectric focusing on cellulose acetate membranes, Farrell et al. (1979) found differences in arylsulfatase A isozymes that correlated with the clinical type of metachromatic leukodystrophy, i.e., juvenile or late infantile. Chang et al. (1982) showed that fusion of cells from the infantile and juvenile forms of MLD did not result in complementation of arylsulfatase A activity, and concluded that they are allelic disorders. |In the cells from patients with juvenile and adult forms of MLD, von Figura et al. (1983) found severe deficiency in the arylsulfatase polypeptide but a rate of synthesis that was 20 to 50% of control. In the absence of NH4Cl, the mutant enzyme was rapidly degraded upon transport into lysosomes. In the presence of inhibitors of thiol proteases, e.g., leupeptin, arylsulfatase A polypeptides were partially protected from degradation with increase in catalytic activity of arylsulfatase A and improved ability of the cells to degrade cerebroside sulfates. Therapeutic use of this approach was suggested. The approach might be useful in other lysosomal storage diseases in which an unstable mutant enzyme is produced, e.g., the late form of glycogen storage disease II (232300). In a study of 8 patients with the juvenile form of MLD, von Figura et al. (1986) found that the mutation leads to the synthesis of arylsulfatase A polypeptides with increased susceptibility to cysteine proteinases. Multiple allelic mutations within this group were suggested by clinical heterogeneity, variability in residual activity, and response to inhibitors (cysteine proteinases). |Pseudoarylsulfatase A deficiency refers to a condition of apparent ARSA enzyme deficiency in persons without neurologic abnormalities. Dubois et al. (1977) described very low arylsulfatase A and cerebroside sulfatase activities in leukocytes of healthy members of a metachromatic leukodystrophy family. Langenbeck et al. (1977) proposed a one locus, multiple allele hypothesis to explain the peculiar findings in that kindred. |Butterworth et al. (1978) reported a child with very low levels of the enzyme whose mother was, seemingly, heterozygous and whose father carried a variant gene giving a very low in vitro level. They concluded that low arylsulfatase A is not necessarily indicative of this disease, which should be taken into consideration when screening for the disease. |A pseudodeficiency allele at the arylsulfatase A locus was delineated by Schaap et al. (1981). Clinically healthy persons with ARSA levels in the range of MLD patients have been found among the relatives of MLD patients. Cultured fibroblasts from persons with pseudodeficiency catabolize cerebroside sulfate; fibroblasts from MLD patients do not. Zlotogora and Bach (1983) pointed out that lysosomal hydrolases deficient in cases of metachromatic leukodystrophy, Tay-Sachs disease, Fabry disease, and Krabbe disease have also been found to be deficient in healthy persons. The authors suggested that most of the latter cases represent the compound heterozygote for the deficient allele and another allele coding for an in vitro low enzyme activity (pseudodeficiency). |Chang and Davidson (1983) could demonstrate no restoration of activity of arylsulfatase A in hybrid cells created from cells of individuals with MLD and individuals with pseudo-ARSA deficiency. They concluded, therefore, that the 2 mutations are allelic. They showed that the 2 conditions can be distinguished in the laboratory by a simple electrophoretic analysis of residual ARSA activity. |Kihara et al. (1986) noted that the apparent enzyme deficiency in persons without neurologic abnormalities is due in part to the nonspecificity of the synthetic substrates used for assays and in part to a high redundancy of arylsulfatase A. |
250850::methionine adenosyltransferase (MAT) I/III deficiency is caused by homozygous, compound heterozygous, or heterozygous mutation in the MAT1A gene (610550) on chromosome 10q22.|Methionine adenosyltransferase deficiency is an inborn error of metabolism resulting in isolated hypermethioninemia. Most patients have no clinical abnormalities, although some with the autosomal recessive form have have neurologic abnormalities (Mudd et al., 2003; Kim et al., 2016). |Gaull and Tallan (1974) reported a female infant with hypermethioninemia detected by newborn screening. Liver biopsy showed a deficiency of methionine adenosyltransferase. A case reported earlier in abstract may have represented this disorder (Hug et al., 1968). Mudd et al. (2003) reported follow-up of the patient reported by Gaull and Tallan (1974). She had completely normal physical and mental development with persistently increased serum methionine levels associated with decreased MAT activity (11% of control values). She had 4 pregnancies beginning at age 23 years. Three pregnancies and children were completely normal; 1 pregnancy resulted in fetal arrest at 10 weeks' gestation and termination, which the authors did not believe was related to the metabolic abnormality. Of note, the patient ingested 2 large eggs daily during the pregnancies to ensure adequate choline delivery to the fetuses. |Finkelstein et al. (1975) observed a male infant ascertained in newborn screening because of hypermethioninemia. At 32 months the child was clinically normal with persistently elevated serum methionine levels. At that time, liver biopsy showed decreased MAT activity. Gout et al. (1977) reported an affected infant in France who had growth retardation, anorexia, digestive disturbances, and a strong smell of 'boiled cabbage' in urine and sweat. At 6-year follow-up, psychomotor and growth developments were excellent on a low-methionine diet, although hypermethioninemia persisted. Liver biopsy showed abnormal kinetics of methionine adenosyltransferase. |Gaull et al. (1981) reported 4 children with hypermethioninemia identified in a neonatal mass screening program. Hepatic methionine adenosyltransferase was decreased to 7.8 to 17.5% of normal controls (mean 11.4%). Electron microscopy of the liver showed increased smooth endoplasmic reticulum, decreased rough endoplasmic reticulum, and increased lysosomes; short breaks in the outer mitochondrial membranes were present to a variable extent. Despite the persistent hypermethioninemia, all 4 children appeared well. In each case the parents were well and unrelated. Gaull et al. (1981) suggested that normal activity of extrahepatic MAT may explain the benign clinical phenotype. |Gahl et al. (1987) reported a 31-year-old man with MAT deficiency, the oldest reported patient at that time. Although he was clinically normal, a long-distance runner, teacher, and father of 3, he had fetid breath, greatly elevated plasma methionine, and met-sulfoxides of 46 micromoles. The bad breath was shown to be due to the presence of unusually large amounts of dimethylsulfide (Gahl et al., 1988). Hazelwood et al. (1998) provided follow-up of this patient. He had normal neurologic status with no evidence of demyelination on MRI. He also had mild aortic regurgitation attributed to rheumatic fever. |Surtees et al. (1991) reported an unusual case of MAT deficiency in an individual with persistent hypermethioninemia who developed abnormal neurologic symptoms and brain demyelination. The patient responded favorably to AdoMet therapy. |Mudd et al. (1995) reviewed the clinical and biochemical features of 30 patients with isolated hypermethioninemia, some of whom had previously been reported. Two patients reported by Gout et al. (1977) and Gaull et al. (1981) with documented MAT deficiency were 24 and 20 years old, respectively, and had no neurologic or intellectual impairment despite persistent increased serum methionine. Twenty-seven patients had normal intelligence and no neurologic signs; 3 had mental retardation or decreased IQ, 2 of whom had neurologic signs. The most severely affected girl had mental retardation, dystonia, and evidence of myelination arrest on MRI; however, she had a brother with dystonia and verbal difficulties who had normal serum methionine. In the patients as a whole, methionine transamination metabolites accumulated abnormally only when plasma methionine concentrations exceeded 300-350 microM and did so more markedly after 0.9 years of age. Mudd et al. (1995) noted that limitation of dietary methionine intake could moderate the abnormal elevations of both methionine and its transamination metabolites in isolated persistent hypermethioninemia, but concluded that dietary restriction is not usually necessary. |
614105::methylmalonate semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency (MMSDHD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ALDH6A1 gene (603178) on chromosome 14q24.|Methylmalonate semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism with a highly variable phenotype. Some patients may be asymptomatic, whereas others show global developmental delay, nonspecific dysmorphic features, and delayed myelination on brain imaging. Laboratory studies typically show increased urinary 3-hydroxyisobutyric acid, although additional metabolic abnormalities may also be observed (summary by Marcadier et al., 2013). |Pollitt et al. (1985) and Gray et al. (1987) reported a male child with methylmalonate semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency characterized by elevated beta-alanine, 3-hydroxypropionic acid, and both isomers of 3-amino and 3-hydroxyisobutyric acids in urine organic acids. The child, who was asymptomatic, was identified through newborn screening. |Shield et al. (2001) reported a girl, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, with significant hypotonia in infancy, poor feeding, and dysmorphic facial features, including narrowed, downslanting palpebral fissures, short convex nose with depressed nasal bridge, microphthalmia, cataracts, and adducted thumbs. She had severe developmental delay and marked postnatal microcephaly. Brain imaging showed delayed myelination and thinning of the corpus callosum. Laboratory studies showed 3-hydroxyisobutyric aciduria and mild lactic acidosis. Family studies identified a brother with 3-hydroxyisobutyric aciduria, microcephaly, and moderate learning difficulties. However, an unaffected brother also had microcephaly, indicating that microcephaly did not segregate with 3-hydroxyisobutyric aciduria in this family. Shield et al. (2001) concluded that the phenotype in the proband was consistent with Warburg Micro syndrome (see, e.g., WARBM1, 600118), but also suggested that the phenotype of the biochemical abnormality may show intrafamilial variability. |Sass et al. (2012) reported a boy, born of related parents of European origin, with MMSDHD. The child was first seen at age 12 months for mildly delayed development, microcephaly, and mild dysmorphic features, such as bulbous nose with hypoplastic nasal alae and long philtrum. Laboratory studies showed increased urinary 3-hydroxyisobutyric acid. He made significant progress on a low-protein, valine-restricted diet and showed normal age-appropriate development at age 25 months. He then developed a febrile illness and showed acute metabolic decompensation, resulting in death from hepatoencephalopathy secondary to liver failure. Of note, the patient had been treated with acetaminophen, and liver samples showed toxic liver injury, although acetaminophen levels were not increased in postmortem tissue. Postmortem examination also showed calcifications in the frontal cortex. |Marcadier et al. (2013) reported a 3-year-old girl with MMSDHD who presented in infancy with global developmental delay, hypotonia, and poor visual fixation. Dysmorphic features included high forehead, sparse hair, epicanthal folds, hypertelorism, short anteverted nose, tented mouth, and high-arched palate. Deep tendon reflexes were brisk, coordination was abnormal, and movements were dystonic. She also showed poor head growth. Laboratory studies over time showed transient and/or variable elevations of lactate, methylmalonic acid, 3-hydroxyisobutyric acid, and 3-aminoisobutyric acid. |
251000::methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) of the complementation group 'mut' is caused by mutation in the gene encoding methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT; 609058).|Methylmalonic aciduria is a genetically heterogeneous disorder of methylmalonate and cobalamin (cbl; vitamin B12) metabolism. Isolated methylmalonic aciduria is found in patients with mutations in the MUT gene causing partial, mut(-), or complete, mut(0), enzyme deficiency. This form is unresponsive to B12 therapy. Various forms of isolated methylmalonic aciduria also occur in a subset of patients with defects in the synthesis of the MUT coenzyme adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl) and are classified according to complementation group: cblA (251100), caused by mutation in the MMAA gene (607481) on chromosome 4q31, and cblB (251110), caused by mutation in the MMAB gene (607568) on 12q24.|Combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria may be seen in complementation groups cblC (277400), cblD (277410), and cblF (277380).|See the comprehensive review of Ledley (1990). |The clinical spectrum of methylmalonic aciduria is wide, ranging from a benign condition (Ledley et al., 1984) to fatal neonatal disease (Matsui et al., 1983). |Oberholzer et al. (1967) reported an inborn error of metabolism characterized by methylmalonic aciduria associated with developmental retardation and chronic metabolic acidosis. Treatment with cobalamin was ineffective. Barness and Morrow (1968) noted that some cases of methylmalonic aciduria responded to vitamin B12. Of those not responsive to B12, only a subset had hyperglycinemia. Morrow et al. (1969) provided enzymatic proof of 2 forms of the disease with regard to response to cobalamin treatment: methylmalonyl-CoA mutase activity was essentially absent from the liver in a vitamin B12-unresponsive case, whereas residual enzyme activity increased to normal with added coenzyme in a vitamin B12-responsive case. The latter case was interpreted as having a defect in AdoCbl synthesis. |Gravel et al. (1975) confirmed the genetic heterogeneity of mut, cblA, cblB, and cblC. In vitro complementation studies measuring C14 incorporation into propionate showed that each of the mutants failed to incorporate C14 alone, whereas heterokaryons produced by fusing members of each of the 4 mutant classes with any other class produced results comparable to controls. |Willard and Rosenberg (1977) found that the mutase enzyme in cells from some MMA patients showed decreased affinity for AdoCbl with abnormally high Km for the coenzyme. These cases were considered to represent a structurally abnormal enzyme and were characteristic of the mut(-) phenotype. By immunohistochemical analysis of the mutase enzyme, Kolhouse et al. (1981) found that cell lines from mut(-) patients had detectable crossreacting material (CRM) ranging from 20 to 100% of control, whereas cells from mut(0) patients had CRM ranging from no detectable protein to 40% of controls. |Matsui et al. (1983) collected detailed information on 45 patients with MMA: 15 with mut(0) type, 5 with mut(-), 14 with cblA, and 11 with cblB. The most common presenting symptoms at onset were lethargy, failure to thrive, recurrent vomiting, dehydration, respiratory distress, and hypotonia. Other common features included hepatomegaly, developmental delay, and coma. Mut(0) patients presented earlier in infancy than the 3 other groups. All patients had methylmalonic acidemia and normal serum cobalamin, and most had metabolic acidosis, ketonuria, hyperammonemia, and hyperglycinemia. Approximately half of all the patients had pancytopenia. Most cblA and nearly half of cblB patients showed a decrease in urine and blood concentrations of methylmalonic acid in response to vitamin B12 supplementation, whereas none of the mut(0) or mut(-) responded. Most cblA, cblB, and mut(-) patients were still living at the time of the report; most mut(0) patients died during the first few months of life. |Shevell et al. (1993) compared the clinical features in 11 mut(0) patients with those in 9 mut(-) patients. All 11 mut(0) patients had an early neonatal presentation; 6 of these patients died in infancy and 3 of 5 survivors had a poor neurologic outcome as evidenced by severe developmental delay or spastic quadriparesis with dystonia. The 2 other survivors included a 27-month-old child with mild delay in verbal and fine motor skills and an adolescent with low normal intelligence. Of the 9 mut(-) patients, 7 became symptomatic in late infancy or childhood and 2 were found on screening. No episode of metabolic decompensation had occurred in 2 of the 9, yet both were neurologically compromised, one being severely retarded and autistic and the other mildly delayed. Four mut(-) patients had had episodic acidosis and were neurologically moderately affected, while 3 had had episodic acidosis but were neurologically intact. Although a broad correlation was found between mutase class and phenotype, survival with good outcome was possible among mut(0) patients and, conversely, significant morbidity occurred among mut(-) patients. Acidosis and metabolic imbalance were not necessary preconditions for significant morbidity. van den Bergh et al. (1992) reported sudden death in a child with MMA. |Giorgio et al. (1976) reported 2 French-Canadian brothers, aged 62 and 70 years, who had a benign form of MMA due to methylmalonyl-CoA mutase deficiency. Neither had anemia or hepatic dysfunction. Serum vitamin B12 was normal and the methylmalonic aciduria was unaffected by administration of vitamin B12 in large dosage. The brothers had presented with adult-onset diabetes mellitus. Ledley et al. (1984) reported a benign form of MMA due to deficiency of methylmalonyl-CoA mutase in 8 children identified through routine neonatal screening or screening of infants with affected sibs. Despite lack of dietary or vitamin therapy, the children had normal growth and development (age range, 18 months to 13 years) and performed as well as their unaffected sibs on psychometric tests. None responded to vitamin B12 treatment and there was no other evidence of a cofactor defect. In 2 sibs, complementation studies showed a defect in the mutase apoenzyme. |Renal insufficiency is frequently reported in mutase-deficient methylmalonic acidemia. Van Calcar et al. (1998) reported a patient with mut(-) MMA who developed chronic tubulointerstitial nephropathy during adolescence. After 24 years of age, she developed end-stage renal failure and underwent renal transplantation. Both plasma and urine methylmalonic acid levels decreased significantly with improved renal function following transplantation. Renal, metabolic, and clinical status remained improved at 3 years after the kidney transplant. |In a review of inherited metabolic disorders and stroke, Testai and Gorelick (2010) noted that patients with branched-chain organic aciduria, including isovaleric aciduria (243500), propionic aciduria (606054), and methylmalonic aciduria can rarely have strokes. Cerebellar hemorrhage has been described in all 3 disorders, and basal ganglia ischemic stroke has been described in propionic aciduria and methylmalonic aciduria. These events may occur in the absence of metabolic decompensation. |Kruszka et al. (2013) studied renal growth in isolated MMA. Fifty patients with MMA (35 mut subtype, 9 cblA subtype, and 6 cblB subtype), followed from 2004 to 2011, were classified by molecular genetics and studied using a combined cross-sectional and longitudinal design that included renal ultrasound examinations, anthropometric measurements, and metabolic phenotyping. Renal length was compared with that of healthy controls and modeled to other clinical parameters using multiple regression analyses. Comparisons with age-matched controls showed that renal length in subjects with MMA was significantly decreased (p less than 0.05). Stepwise regression modeling found that combinations of height, serum cystatin C (604312), and serum methylmalonic acid concentrations best predicted kidney size. Kruszka et al. (2013) concluded that renal length, reflective of kidney growth, significantly decreased in patients with MMA over time as compared with controls and was predictable with select clinical parameters. Cystatin C and serum methylmalonic acid concentrations were highly correlated with smaller kidneys and decreased renal function in this patient population. |
277400::combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria type cblC (MAHCC) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the MMACHC gene (609831) on chromosome 1p34.|There is also evidence that MAHCC is caused by digenic mutations: one caused by a coding MAHCC mutation, and the other, a secondary epimutation, triggered by a mutation in the PRDX1 gene (176763).|Combined methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) and homocystinuria is a genetically heterogeneous disorder of cobalamin (cbl; vitamin B12) metabolism. The defect causes decreased levels of the coenzymes adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl) and methylcobalamin (MeCbl), which results in decreased activity of the respective enzymes methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT; 609058) and methyltetrahydrofolate:homocysteine methyltransferase, also known as methionine synthase (MTR; 156570). Different forms of the disorder have been classified according to complementation groups of cells in vitro: cblC, cblD (277410), cblF (277380), and cblJ (614857).|Isolated methylmalonic acidurias have also been classified by complementation groups: MMA 'mut' (251000) is caused by mutation in the MUT gene on chromosome 6p21; MMA cblA (251100) is caused by mutation in the MMAA gene (607481) on 4q31; and MMA cblB (251110) is caused by mutation in the MMAB gene (607568) on 12q24.|Methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria, cblC type, is the most common inborn error of vitamin B12 (cobalamin) metabolism, with about 250 known cases (Lerner-Ellis et al., 2006). Affected individuals may have developmental, hematologic, neurologic, metabolic, ophthalmologic, and dermatologic clinical findings. Although considered a disease of infancy or childhood, some individuals develop symptoms in adulthood (Rosenblatt et al., 1997). |Mudd et al. (1969) reported an infant with homocysteinemia, methylmalonic aciduria, cystathioninemia, and a decrease in blood methionine. He died at 7.5 weeks of age. In vitro analysis identified a defect in the 2 reactions in which vitamin B12 derivatives function as coenzymes: methionine formation from 5-methylfolate-H(4) (MTR) and homocysteine, and isomerization of methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA (MUT). Since vitamin B12 was present in normal concentrations in the liver, Mudd et al. (1969) concluded that the gene-determined defect involved the conversion of B12 to the active coenzymes. McCully (1969) studied the same patient as that reported by Mudd et al. (1970) and noted arterial changes and atherosclerosis on pathologic examination. |The patient described by Dillon et al. (1974) differed from the others in that in addition to severe mental retardation and megaloblastosis, clinical and pathologic changes typical of subacute degeneration of the spinal cord were present. Baumgartner et al. (1979) reported a male infant who died at 4 months of age after 2 episodes of acute heart failure. He had hemolytic and megaloblastic anemia, hematuria, proteinuria, and mild uremia. Plasma and urine levels of methionine were low, whereas levels of cystathionine were increased. Vitamin B12 deficiency, malabsorption, and transport defect were excluded by normal serum cobalamin and transcobalamins. Autopsy showed severe vascular lesions with changes of thrombotic thrombocytopenia in the kidney, suggesting the hemolytic-uremic syndrome. Elevated plasma homocysteine was presumed to be responsible for the vascular lesions. Analysis of postmortem liver showed deficiency of both cobalamin-dependent enzymes. |Brandstetter et al. (1990) reported a 16-week-old infant with cblC who died from cor pulmonale due to thromboemboli in the pulmonary circulation. They suggested that the pathogenesis was the same as that of thromboembolic disease in homocystinuria due to cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency (236200). Brandstetter et al. (1990) emphasized the frequent finding of pigmentary retinopathy and abnormality in the macular area of the ocular fundus. Russo et al. (1992) described 3 infants with cblC disease characterized by metabolic acidosis, methylmalonic aciduria, and homocystinuria. In the first weeks of life, all showed failure to thrive, hypotonia, and lethargy associated with pancytopenia and hepatic dysfunction, which progressed to severe respiratory insufficiency and renal failure consistent with hemolytic-uremic syndrome. The infants died at 40, 45, and 75 days of age. Postmortem findings were dominated by thrombotic microangiopathy of the kidneys and lungs, diffuse hepatic steatosis, and megaloblastic changes in the bone marrow. Severe gastritis with striking cystic dysplastic mucosal changes and total absence of parietal and chief cells was found in all 3 patients, with the rest of the gastrointestinal tract being essentially normal. |Rosenblatt et al. (1997) reviewed 50 cblC patients who could be classified into 2 broad phenotypes: 44 had early onset and 6 had later onset. The 44 patients presented in the first year of life with feeding difficulties, hypotonia, developmental delay, seizures, pigmentary retinopathy, and anemia. About one-fourth of the patients died, and those who survived had neurologic impairment. |Cerone et al. (1999) described mild facial anomalies in combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria of the cblC form. Features included a long face, high forehead, large, floppy, and low-set ears, and flat philtrum. The morphologic characteristics became more evident after 3 years of age, and were noted separately by physicians of 2 different departments. A female patient showed high forehead and low-set ears when first observed at the age of 2 months. |Andersson et al. (1999) described the clinical and biochemical features of 8 cblC patients who were treated for an average of 5.7 years. Treatment consisted of daily oral carnitine and intramuscular hydroxocobalamin. The patients had congenital malformations including microcephaly at birth (2 of 8), congenital heart disease (2 of 8), dysmorphic facial features (1 of 8), and thyroglossal duct cyst (1 of 8). Postnatal hydrocephalus (2 of 8) and hip dislocation caused by ligament laxity (1 of 8) were also noted. One patient had profound visual impairment before 6 months of age secondary to cblC retinopathy, and 2 patients had abnormal retinal pigmentation with normal visual function. All patients presented with poor growth, feeding problems, and/or seizures. |Van Hove et al. (2002) described a 12-year-old boy and his 4-year-old sister who presented with proteinuria, hematuria, hypertension, and chronic hemolytic anemia. Renal biopsy showed a chronic thrombotic microangiopathic nephropathy. Hyperhomocysteinemia and mild methylmalonic aciduria were also found. Fibroblast studies were compatible with a mild cblC complementation group. The children had no neurologic symptoms and minimal pigmentary retinal abnormalities. Both children and their father carried a balanced reciprocal translocation, t(8;19)(q23.2;q13.3). Treatment with higher than usual doses of parenteral hydroxycobalamin and oral betaine stopped the thrombotic microangiopathy. |Schimel and Mets (2006) reported the ocular findings in 3 patients with cblC disease. All 3 presented with macular pigmentary changes and showed attenuation of electroretinographic (ERG) responses. Based on the findings in these patients and a literature review, Schimel and Mets (2006) concluded that cblC disease results in progressive retinal degeneration beginning in the first few months of life and progressing rapidly over the first few years of life. |Komhoff et al. (2013) studied 4 patients with combined pulmonary arterial hypertension and renal thrombotic microangiopathy, who were identified from the Dutch national referral center for pediatric pulmonary hypertension. A fifth patient with this combination was contacted to collect clinical data. All 5 had cobalamin C (cblC) deficiency, diagnosed postmortem in 2 patients. Onset of disease ranged from 1.5 to 14 years of age. The 2 youngest patients presented with concomitant pulmonary and renal disease; in the older patients, pulmonary arterial hypertension was preceded by renal thrombotic microangiopathy from age 2.5 to 7 years. Three patients presenting at 3 years of age or younger died of right ventricular failure secondary to progressive pulmonary arterial hypertension. Three patients were treated with hydroxocobalamin; 1 died 2 weeks after diagnosis, 1 exhibited progressive pulmonary vasculopathy, and 1 patient was in stable condition at the time of the study. cblC deficiency was diagnosed biochemically 2 days to 18 years after initial presentation. Komhoff et al. (2013) identified cblC deficiency as the cause of the rare combination of pulmonary arterial hypertension and renal thrombotic microangiopathy in these patients. The authors proposed that early recognition of cblC deficiency and vigorous treatment with hydroxocobalamin may ameliorate the devastating course of this condition. |Ahrens-Nicklas et al. (2017) completed a retrospective analysis of 12 patients with cblC referred for abnormal newborn screening results and followed at the Children's Hospital of Pennsylvania between 1999 and 2015. Of the patients, 87.5% had intellectual disability and 75% had retinopathy; 16.7% had 1 episode of mild acidosis. However, no patients manifested major metabolic decompensation. Developmental outcomes correlated more closely with initial metabolic abnormalities than with long-term metabolic control. Increased intake of medical foods resulted in better control but also perturbations in the ratios of essential amino acids and lower z-scores for head circumference. Ahrens-Nicklas et al. (2017) found no relationship between diet and cognitive outcomes. |Goodman et al. (1970) reported 2 brothers with a milder, possibly allelic form of the disorder. The elder, a 14-year-old Mexican American, was first admitted to the hospital in an acute psychotic episode. He had an IQ of about 50, a somewhat marfanoid habitus, and mild abnormalities on neurologic examination. Ectopia lentis and chest deformity were lacking. The parents were first cousins once removed. |Shinnar and Singer (1984) described a clinically atypical patient with the cblC defect. An adolescent girl had been a straight-A student and in excellent health until age 12. Over the period of a year, her grades deteriorated markedly and her work became equivalent to that of a first-grader. She developed apathy, unsteady gait, and impaired speech. Examination showed broad-based gait, impaired vibration and position sense, and extensor Babinski response. IQ was 40 to 50. Hemoglobin was 12.6 gm%, mean corpuscular volume 96, serum B12 level normal, and red cell folate level 88 ng per ml red cells (mildly decreased). Blood showed elevated homocysteine and only a trace of methionine. The urine contained large amounts of homocysteine and methylmalonic acid. On parenteral hydroxycobalamin (1,000 micrograms per day), the patient improved markedly. A 12-year-old sister and an 8-week-old brother were found to have the same cblC defect, confirmed by fibroblast studies. |Rosenblatt et al. (1997) found that 6 of 50 cblC patients had later onset, after age 4 years. These patients presented with acute neurologic dysfunction, including cognitive decline, confusion, psychosis, dementia, and extrapyramidal signs. Later-onset patients had better survival, better response to treatment, and less neurologic sequelae compared to the early-onset patients. |Bodamer et al. (2001) reported what they believed to be the first case of adult-onset cblC. The patient was a 20-year-old man who presented with slowly progressive leg weakness, loss of bowel and bladder function, episodes of forgetfulness, slurred speech, and deep venous thromboses. He later became unresponsive and required mechanical ventilation. A diagnosis of cobalamin defect was suggested after he was determined to have elevated plasma homocysteine and methylmalonic aciduria. Treatment with hydroxycobalamin and carnitine proved effective. The authors suggested that the patient may have had a mild mutation resulting in significant residual enzyme activity. |Ben-Omran et al. (2007) reported 2 unrelated patients with late-onset cblC disease. The first patient was a 14-year old girl, born of first-cousin Pakistani parents, who developed progressive neurologic decline, including dementia, depression, ataxia, lethargy, incontinence, and seizures over a period of 2 years. After visits to several physicians without a correct diagnosis, analysis of plasma and urine showed increased homocysteine and methylmalonate consistent with a defect in cobalamin synthesis. Appropriate treatment resulted in clinical improvement with residual mild gait ataxia. The second patient was a 10-year-old girl of Bengali descent who presented with acute dementia, anorexia, extreme weight loss, and 'catatonic psychotic behavior.' She had a mild learning disability with an IQ of 72 and seizures. Brain MRI performed at ages 4 and 10 years showed progressive volume loss. Laboratory analysis detected cblC disease, and appropriate treatment resulted in clinical improvement. Both patients were found to be homozygous for the R132X mutation in the MMACHC gene (609831.0003). Ben-Omran et al. (2007) noted the diagnostic difficulty in late-onset cblC disease and emphasized the utility of plasma and urine analysis, as patients may have normal red blood cell indices. |Tsai et al. (2007) described a 36-year-old woman with a spinal cord infarct who was subsequently diagnosed with methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria, cblC type. Her past medical history was significant for joint hypermobility, arthritis, bilateral cataracts, unilateral hearing loss, chronic anemia, and frequent urinary tract infections secondary to a urogenital fistula. She reported emotional difficulties beginning in her teens and was diagnosed with depression and psychosis requiring hospitalization in her thirties. One to 2 years prior to the spinal cord infarct, the patient experienced increasing muscular weakness, leg paresthesias, and difficulty walking. The woman sought help in the emergency department for her weakness and parasthesia but was misdiagnosed with malingering because of her psychiatric history. One week later, she experienced lower extremity hemiplegia, and bladder incontinence and diagnosed with a spinal cord infarct. Laboratory evaluation revealed elevated homocysteine and methylmalonic acid consistent with cblC disease. Molecular analysis of the MMACHC gene revealed the 271dupA (609831.0001) and R161Q (609831.0005) mutations. Tsai et al. (2007) recommended that all patients with psychiatric disease complicated by dementia and myelopathy be screened with plasma amino acids and urine organic acids allowing cblC disease to be preliminarily diagnosed or effectively excluded. |
251100::methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) of the cblA complementation type is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the MMAA gene (607481) on chromosome 4q31. MMAA is involved in the synthesis of adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl), a coenzyme for methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT; 609058).|Methylmalonic aciduria is a genetically heterogeneous disorder of methylmalonate and cobalamin (cbl; vitamin B12) metabolism. Different forms of isolated methylmalonic aciduria have been classified according to complementation groups of cells in vitro. Patients with defects in the synthesis of AdoCbl are usually responsive to vitamin B12 therapy and are classified as 'cbl' type: these include cblA and cblB (251110), which is caused by mutation in the MMAB gene (607568) on 12q24. See also cblH (277410), which may be a subset of cblA. The 'mut' form of MMA (251000) is caused by mutation in the MUT gene on chromosome 6p. In general, the mut form of MMA is unresponsive to vitamin B12 therapy.|Combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria may be seen in complementation groups cblC (277400), cblD (277410), cblF (277380), and cblJ (614857).|Rosenberg et al. (1968, 1968) described an 8-month-old boy with profound metabolic acidosis, developmental retardation, and an unusual biochemical triad: methylmalonic aciduria, long chain ketonuria, and intermittent hyperglycinemia. Valine, isoleucine, or high protein intake accentuated the biochemical abnormalities. The authors presented indirect evidence of deficient activity of methylmalonyl-CoA isomerase (mutase), but unlike other cases of methylmalonic aciduria, the patient responded to vitamin B12 administration. Rosenberg et al. (1969) suggested that the primary defect in B12-responsive methymalonic aciduria was impaired ability to synthesize the coenzyme AdoCbl. |Mahoney et al. (1975) identified 4 forms of methylmalonic aciduria as defined by ability to synthesize AdoCbl: patients with deficiency of the mutase apoenzyme retained the ability to synthesize both AdoCbl and MeCbl ('mut'); a second group had a deficiency in synthesis of both AdoCbl and MeCbl ('cblC'); a third had isolated AdoCbl deficiency which was corrected in a broken cell extract ('cblA'); and a fourth had isolated AdoCbl deficiency which persisted in a broken cell extract ('cblB'). Mahoney et al. (1975) concluded that the final 2-steps of AdoCbl synthesis, reduction of cob(II)alamin and subsequent adenosylation to form AdoCbl, occurred in the mitochondria, and postulated that a defect in entry to the mitochondrion may explain the cblA form that showed restitution of AdoCbl synthesis in broken cell extracts. |Gravel et al. (1975) confirmed the genetic heterogeneity of mut, cblA, cblB, and cblC. In vitro complementation studies measuring C14 incorporation into propionate showed that each of the mutants failed to incorporate C14 alone, whereas heterokaryons produced by fusing members of each of the 4 mutant classes with any other class produced results comparable to controls. |Matsui et al. (1983) collected detailed information on 45 patients with MMA: 15 with mut(0) type, 5 with mut(-), 14 with cblA, and 11 with cblB. The most common presenting symptoms at onset were lethargy, failure to thrive, recurrent vomiting, dehydration, respiratory distress, and hypotonia. Other common features included hepatomegaly, developmental delay, and coma. Mut(0) patients presented earlier in infancy than the 3 other groups. All patients had methylmalonic acidemia and normal serum cobalamin, and most had metabolic acidosis, ketonuria, hyperammonemia, and hyperglycinemia. Approximately half of all the patients had pancytopenia. Most cblA and nearly half of cblB patients showed a decrease in urine and blood concentrations of methylmalonic acid in response to vitamin B12 supplementation, whereas none of the mut(0) or mut(-) responded. Most cblA, cblB, and mut(-) patients were still living at the time of the report; most mut(0) patients died during the first few months of life. |Dobson et al. (2002) confirmed the cblA phenotype by molecular analysis in 4 patients with MMA. Age at symptomatic onset was 2 days to 7 months. Clinical features included lethargy, vomiting, poor feeding, and cbl-responsive MMA. One patient had seizures and another had generalized fine tremors. After incubation with cobalamin, AdoCbl increased to 5 to 7.5% of total Cbl as compared to normal levels of about 10%. Methylmalonic mutase activity also increased, as evidenced by C14-propionate uptake. |
251110::methylmalonic aciduria (MMA) of the cblB complementation type is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the MMAB gene (607568) on chromosome 12q24. MMAB encodes cob(I)alamin transferase, which is involved in the synthesis of adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl), a coenzyme for methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT; 609058).|Methylmalonic aciduria is a genetically heterogeneous disorder of methylmalonate and cobalamin (cbl; vitamin B12) metabolism. Different forms of isolated methylmalonic aciduria have been classified according to complementation groups of cells in vitro. Patients with defects in the synthesis of AdoCbl are usually responsive to vitamin B12 therapy and are classified as 'cbl' type: these include cblB and cblA (251100). The cblA type is caused by mutation in the MMAA gene (607481). The 'mut' type (251000) is caused by mutation in the MUT gene; in general, the mut form of MMA is unresponsive to vitamin B12 therapy.|Combined methylmalonic aciduria and homocystinuria may be seen in complementation groups cblC (277400), cblD (277410), and cblF (277380).|Fenton and Rosenberg (1981) reported deficiency of cob(I)alamin transferase in the cblB type of methylmalonic acidemia. |Dobson et al. (2002) reported the clinical features of 6 patients with the cblB type, confirmed by molecular analysis. Age at onset was in the first days of life with lethargy, vomiting, failure to thrive, respiratory distress, metabolic acidosis, methymalonic aciduria, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and moderate hyperammonemia. AdoCbl levels as a percentage of total Cbl ranged from 0.8 to 6.5%, although 1 patient had 13.1% (control value 15%). Propionate uptake, indicating MUT activity, was also decreased; however, addition of B12 to the medium did not significantly increase enzyme activity. The findings indicated that patients with cblB are less responsive to vitamin B12 therapy than those with cblA. |Jorge-Finnigan et al. (2010) reported 4 patients, including 2 sibs, with MMA type cblB. Two unrelated patients had onset as neonates with vastly different outcomes: 1 had severe encephalopathy at age 7 years, whereas the other was asymptomatic at age 12 years. Of the 2 sibs, 1 had late onset at age 4 years and died at age 4 years, whereas the younger sib was diagnosed at age 3 months and was asymptomatic at age 5 years. The patients who did well clinically were under protein restriction, had B12 supplementation, and were monitored and managed during metabolic crises. |Brasil et al. (2015) reported 2 asymptomatic sibs with MMA type cblB who were identified by newborn screening. By flow cytometry, Brasil et al. (2015) found increased levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in cells derived from the sibs, as well as in cells derived from the sibs reported by Jorge-Finnigan et al. (2010), with higher levels in the sib who died compared to the living sib. Patient fibroblasts also showed decreased oxygen consumption rate and mitochondrial abnormalities, including marked fission, reduced numbers of mitochondria, smaller mitochondria, lack of cristae, rarefaction of the matrix, and grain-like inclusions. The findings implicated mitochondrial dysfunction in the pathogenesis of this disorder. |
610377::mevalonic aciduria (MEVA) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the mevalonate kinase gene (MVK; 251170) on chromosome 12q24.|Mevalonic aciduria, the first recognized defect in the biosynthesis of cholesterol and isoprenoids, is a consequence of a deficiency of mevalonate kinase (ATP:mevalonate 5-phosphotransferase; EC 2.7.1.36). Mevalonic acid accumulates because of failure of conversion to 5-phosphomevalonic acid, which is catalyzed by mevalonate kinase. Mevalonic acid is synthesized from 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA, a reaction catalyzed by HMG-CoA reductase (142910).Mevalonic aciduria is characterized by dysmorphology, psychomotor retardation, progressive cerebellar ataxia, and recurrent febrile crises, usually manifesting in early infancy, accompanied by hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, arthralgia, and skin rash. The febrile crises are similar to those observed in hyperimmunoglobulinemia D and to periodic fever syndrome (HIDS; 260920), which is also caused by mutation in the MVK gene (summary by Prietsch et al., 2003). |Hoffmann et al. (1986) delineated this inborn error of metabolism in a boy who came to their attention at age 2 years and in an unborn female sib. The boy presented with severe failure to thrive, developmental delay, anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, central cataracts, and dysmorphic facies. In the urine, they found massive quantities of mevalonic acid, a precursor of cholesterol and nonsterol isoprenes: 46,000 and 56,200 mmol per mole of creatinine, as compared with 0.2-0.3 mmol per mole in normal children. In plasma, the concentration of mevalonic acid was about 9,000 times normal. The activity of mevalonate kinase, the enzyme that catalyzes the first step in mevalonate metabolism, was severely deficient in the patient's fibroblasts, lymphocytes, and lymphoblasts, and was about half-normal in each parent. The proband died at 24.5 months. In the mother's next pregnancy, the concentration of mevalonic acid was found to be very high in the amniotic fluid. A therapeutic abortion was performed at 19 weeks. The fetus was female and seemingly normal. Defects in synthetic pathways such as this are fewer than defects in catabolic pathways. As in the porphyrias and in glutathione synthetase deficiency (266130), feedback inhibition is lacking because the final product is underproduced. This leads to overproduction and massive urinary excretion of intermediates such as delta-aminolevulinic acid and porphyrins in porphyrias and 5-oxoproline in glutathione synthetase deficiency. The failure to thrive may have been due to loss of almost 9 grams daily of mevalonic acid in the urine. |Berger et al. (1985) described a milder case of mevalonic aciduria, with cerebellar ataxia. In the family first reported by Hoffmann et al. (1986), Gibson et al. (1987) found enzyme levels indicating heterozygosity in 1 sib of the proband, both parents, and 3 other relatives of each of the parents. Gibson et al. (1988) documented mevalonate kinase deficiency in an 8-year-old child who presented with cerebellar ataxia, hypotonia, and mevalonic aciduria. Heterozygotes showed intermediate levels of the enzyme in cultured skin fibroblasts and transformed lymphoblasts. Mancini et al. (1993) described the disorder in 2 girls and 1 boy, the offspring of parents related as first cousins once removed. All 3 showed failure to thrive, susceptibility to infections, hepatosplenomegaly, cataract, and psychomotor retardation. Dysmorphic features included microcephaly, triangular face, and hypoplastic alae nasi. Urinary organic acid analysis by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry invariably demonstrated a high urinary excretion of mevalonic acid. Mevalonate kinase activity assayed in fibroblasts was very low. |To establish the clinical and biochemical phenotype of mevalonic aciduria, a consortium of authors (Hoffmann et al., 1993) assembled their experience with 11 patients, including attempts at therapeutic intervention. Varying degrees of severity of clinical illness were observed despite uniform, virtual absence of residual activity of mevalonate kinase. The most severely affected patients had profound developmental delay, dysmorphic features, cataracts, hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, and anemia, as well as diarrhea and malabsorption, and died in infancy. Less severely affected patients had psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, myopathy, and ataxia. All patients had recurrent crises in which there was fever, lymphadenopathy, increase in size of liver and spleen, arthralgia, edema, and a morbilliform rash. Neuroimaging studies revealed selective and progressive atrophy of the cerebellum. Mevalonic acid concentrations were grossly elevated in body fluids in all patients. Concentrations of plasma cholesterol were normal or only slightly reduced. Concentrations of ubiquinone-10 in plasma were found to be decreased in most patients. Abnormalities such as hypoglycemia, metabolic acidosis, or lactic acidemia, the usual concomitants of disorders of organic acid metabolism, were conspicuously absent. |Hinson et al. (1998) reported 2 additional patients with MVK deficiency. Both patients presented in infancy, one with severe normocytic anemia, petechiae, cutaneous extramedullary hematopoiesis, hepatosplenomegaly, leukocytosis, and recurrent febrile episodes, and the other with minor anomalies, hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, thrombocytopenia, recurrent febrile crises, and facial rashes. Neither patient had significant neurologic abnormalities. The authors noted that MVK deficiency can mimic congenital infections, myelodysplastic syndromes, or chronic leukemia, and emphasized the importance of considering this diagnosis in patients with hematologic abnormalities. |Prietsch et al. (2003) reported a 15-year-old girl and her 14-year-old brother with mevalonic aciduria, previously described by Hoffmann et al. (1993), in whom the phenotype shifted with age, with ataxia becoming the predominant clinical manifestation and febrile attacks occurring less frequently as they grew older. Both sibs showed marked elevations of immunoglobulin D (IgD) and also exhibited short stature, kyphoscoliosis, obesity, and delayed psychomotor development. Additional findings included the development of nuclear cataract and retinal dystrophy in both patients; electroretinography in the brother showed undetectable scotopic and photopic responses. Prietsch et al. (2003) also described a 6-year-old boy whose mevalonic aciduria was discovered on metabolic screening at 5.5 years of age due to mild psychomotor retardation and general 'clumsiness.' He never underwent febrile crises and his IgD levels were repeatedly normal. MRI showed severe cerebellar atrophy, consistent with his predominant symptom of moderate cerebellar ataxia. Ophthalmologic examination showed retinal dystrophy with field constriction and lack of dark adaptation, primarily in the retinal periphery, as well as thinned retinal vessels, uneven retinal surface reflections, and moderate optic atrophy, but no bone-spicule pigmentation. Prietsch et al. (2003) stated that this was the first report of adolescent MEVA patients, and that in patients who survive infancy, the predominant findings include short stature, ataxia caused by cerebellar atrophy, and ocular involvement with retinal dystrophy. They noted that recurrent febrile crises seem to diminish with increasing age and might not be an obligatory finding, and they suggested that IgD elevation might be a secondary phenomenon linked to recurrent febrile crises. |Mandey et al. (2006) reviewed aspects of mevalonate kinase deficiency (MKD), of which classic mevalonic aciduria and the autoinflammatory hyperimmunoglobulinemia D and periodic fever syndrome (HIDS; 260920) represent the severe and mild clinical ends of the spectrum. Patients with the HIDS phenotype typically present only with recurrent episodes of fever and associated inflammatory symptoms, whereas patients with mevalonic aciduria show, in addition to these episodes, developmental delay, dysmorphic features, ataxia, cerebellar atrophy, and psychomotor retardation and may die in early childhood (Hoffmann et al., 1993). Cells from patients with the HIDS phenotype still contain residual mevalonate kinase enzyme activities from 1 to 8% of the activities of control cells, while in cells from patients with the mevalonic aciduria phenotype the enzyme activity is below the level of detection. This difference in residual enzyme activity is also reflected in the occurrence of high levels of mevalonic acid in plasma, urine, and tissues of patients with the mevalonic aciduria phenotype and low to moderately increased levels of mevalonic acid in patients with the HIDS presentation. |
157300::Migraine is the most common type of chronic, episodic headache, as summarized by Featherstone (1985). |One locus for migraine with or without aura (MGR1) has been identified on chromosome 4q24. Other loci for migraine have been identified on 6p21.1-p12.2 (MGR3; 607498), 14q21.2-q22.3 (MGR4; 607501), 19p13 (MGR5; 607508), 1q31 (MGR6; 607516), 15q11-q13 (MGR7; 609179), 5q21 (with or without aura, MGR8, 609570; with aura, MGR9, 609670), 17p13 (MGR10; 610208), 18q12 (MGR11; 610209), 10q22-q23 (MGR12; 611706), and the X chromosome (MGR2; 300125).|Mutation in the KCNK18 gene (613655) on chromosome 10q25 causes migraine with aura (MGR13; 613656).|A subtype of autosomal dominant migraine with aura (MA), familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM; see 141500), is caused by mutation in the CACNA1A gene (601011) on chromosome 19p13 (FHM1; 141500), by mutation in the ATP1A2 gene (182340) on chromosome 1q21 (FHM2; 602481), or by mutation in the SCN1A gene (182389) on chromosome 2q24 (FHM3; 609634). Another locus for FHM has been mapped to chromosome 1q31 (FHM4; see 607516).|There is evidence that a polymorphism in the estrogen receptor gene (ESR1; 133430.0005) and a polymorphism in the TNF gene (191160.0004) may confer susceptibility to migraine. A polymorphism in the endothelin receptor type A gene (EDNRA; 131243.0001) may confer resistance to migraine.|Most cases of migraine are of the mild rather than the classic type, which has prodromal neurologic deficit and severe, focal head pain. Since no biochemical marker for migraine has been found, migraine and its variants remain a clinical diagnosis (Featherstone, 1985). Refsum (1968), Raskin (1988), and Miller (1991) provided extensive reviews of all aspects of migraine. |In a study of 532 persons with migraine, Stewart et al. (2006) found that the relative risk (RR) of migraine in first-degree relatives was significantly increased (RR of 1.88) compared to controls. The RR of migraine was even higher for relatives of probands with onset before age 16 years (RR of 2.50) and with more severe pain (RR of 2.38). The results suggested higher levels of familial aggregation of migraines in those with earlier onset and more severe pain scores. |In a population-based case-control study of 140 Icelandic children with seizures and 180 controls, Ludvigsson et al. (2006) found that migraine with aura conferred an odds ratio of 8.1 for subsequent development of unprovoked seizures (see, e.g., idiopathic generalized epilepsy, EIG; 600669). Migraine without aura did not increase the risk for seizures. The prevalence of both types of migraine was 20.2% in children with seizures and 6.9% in controls. The findings were consistent with the hypothesis that migraine with aura and migraine without aura are separate disease entities, and suggested that migraine with aura and seizures may share a common pathogenesis. |
143465::multiple genes contribute to the phenotype of attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (see MOLECULAR GENETICS section).|Several loci have been found to be associated with susceptibility to ADHD, including ADHD1 (608903) on chromosome 16p13, ADHD2 (608904) on chromosome 17p11, ADHD3 (608905) on chromosome 6q12, ADHD4 (608906) on chromosome 5p13, ADHD5 (612311) on 2q21.1, and ADHD6 (612312) on 13q12.11.|A mutation in the TPH2 gene (607478) on chromosome 12q21 is associated with susceptibility to ADHD (ADHD7; 613003).|ADHD is the most common childhood-onset behavioral disorder, affecting approximately 5 to 10% of children and adolescents (Wolraich et al., 1996). In this condition, persistent inattention and/or hyperactive-impulsive behavior results in impaired social and/or academic functioning. Boys are affected about 8 times more frequently than girls (Zametkin et al., 1990). |By means of positron-emission tomography (PET) of the brain using (18F)-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose, Zametkin et al. (1990) found that global cerebral glucose metabolism was 8.1% lower in adults with hyperactivity than in normal controls. Glucose metabolism was significantly reduced in 30 of 60 specific regions of the brain. Among the regions with greatest reduction were the premotor cortex and the superior prefrontal cortex. This study was done in adults because of ethical considerations about exposing children to a radioactive tracer; however, each of the 25 hyperactive adults was the biologic parent of a hyperactive child. Biederman et al. (1990) reported that 28.6% of the biologic parents of hyperactive children also had a history of hyperactivity. The parents in this study continued to have symptoms as adults. |Smalley (1997) reviewed studies of the genetics of ADHD and autism (209850). Zametkin and Ernst (1999) reviewed the diagnostic criteria, differential diagnosis, and treatment of ADHD. |Kuntsi et al. (2004) found that 86% of the association between ADHD symptom scores and IQ, and 100% of the association between ADHD diagnosis and IQ was accounted for by genetic influences that are shared by ADHD and IQ. In a large population-based sample of 5-year-old twins (both monozygotic and dizygotic), they assessed twins individually on IQ tests, and data on ADHD symptoms were obtained from mothers' and teachers' ratings. The correlation between ADHD symptoms and IQ was -0.3 (on average ADHD diagnosed children obtained an IQ score 9 points lower than comparison children). |
611126::mitochondrial complex I deficiency nuclear type 20 (MC1DN20) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ACAD9 gene (611103) on chromosome 3q21.|MC1DN20 is an autosomal recessive multisystem disorder characterized by infantile onset of acute metabolic acidosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and muscle weakness associated with a deficiency of mitochondrial complex I activity in muscle, liver, and fibroblasts (summary by Haack et al., 2010). For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of mitochondrial complex I deficiency, see 252010.|Haack et al. (2010) reported 4 patients, including 2 sibs, with mitochondrial complex I deficiency. In the 2 sibs, the sister presented soon after birth with cardiorespiratory depression, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, encephalopathy, and severe lactic acidosis, and died at 46 days of age. Compared to controls, complex I activity was reduced to 9 to 14% in patient muscle, 1% in patient liver, and 32 to 39% in patient fibroblasts. Complex V activity was reduced to 52% in patient muscle and 38% in patient liver. The complex I holoenzyme was reduced by 35% in mutant cells, suggesting either complex I instability or impaired assembly. Her brother, who presented at birth with hypotonia, cardiohypertrophy, and lactic acidosis, received vigorous treatment with riboflavin, which resulted in a favorable clinical response; he had no cognitive impairment and normal psychomotor development at 5 years of age. Two additional unrelated girls with the disorder were also reported: both had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, encephalopathy, and lactic acidosis, and died at age 2 and 12 years, respectively. None of the patients had evidence of a defect in beta-oxidation of fatty acids. |Haack et al. (2012) reported a family in which 3 patients had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, hypotonia, lactic acidosis, and exercise intolerance associated with complex I deficiency. Complex I activity was 3% of normal in muscle biopsy from 1 of the patients. |He et al. (2007) reported 3 cases of complex I deficiency presenting with episodic liver dysfunction during otherwise mild illnesses or cardiomyopathy, along with chronic neurologic dysfunction. Patient 1 was a 14-year-old previously healthy boy who died of a Reye-like episode and cerebellar stroke triggered by a mild viral illness and ingestion of aspirin. Findings on autopsy included diffuse hepatic microvesicular steatosis and some macrovesicular steatosis, which were interpreted as being consistent with Reye-like syndrome. Brain findings were notable for generalized edema with diffuse ventricular compression, acute left tonsillar herniation, and diffuse multifocal acute damage in the hippocampus. In addition, some abnormalities consistent with nonacute changes were seen, including a subacute right cerebellar hemispheric infarct and reduction in the number of neurons in several areas. Patient 2 was a 10-year-old girl who first presented at age 4 months with fulminant liver failure, and thereafter experienced recurrent episodes of acute liver dysfunction and hypoglycemia, with otherwise minor illnesses. Patient 3 was a 4.5-year-old girl who died of cardiomyopathy and whose sib also died of cardiomyopathy at age 22 months. Mild chronic neurologic dysfunction was reported. All 3 patients had biochemical findings suggestive of an unknown long-chain fat metabolism defect. |Dewulf et al. (2016) reported 9 additional patients, 7 girls and 2 boys, with complex I deficiency from 3 unrelated families. Most presented in the neonatal period with lactate acidosis and died in infancy. In addition to the previously reported hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 5 of the patients (representing 2 families) had patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). Two sibs from family II presented in childhood with exercise intolerance and were clinically stable in their mid-20s under riboflavin treatment with mild left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). |
612073::mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome-5 (MTDPS5) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the beta subunit of the succinate-CoA ligase gene (SUCLA2; 603921) on chromosome 13q14.See MTDPS9 (245400) for a description of a similar disorder caused by mutation in the alpha subunit of the succinate-CoA ligase gene (SUCLG1; 611224).|Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome-5 is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by infantile onset of hypotonia, progressive neurologic deterioration, a hyperkinetic-dystonic movement disorder, external ophthalmoplegia, deafness, and variable renal tubular dysfunction. Laboratory studies often show mild methylmalonic aciduria (Carrozzo et al., 2007). For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of mtDNA depletion syndromes, see MTDPS1 (603041).|Elpeleg et al. (2005) reported a small Muslim pedigree with an autosomal recessive encephalomyopathy associated with mtDNA depletion. The proband showed irritability and inconsolable crying in early infancy. She had severely delayed psychomotor development with marked muscle hypotonia, impaired hearing, and generalized seizures. Brain MRI was suggestive of Leigh syndrome (256000). At age 7 years, she was severely retarded and had contractures of the knee and hip joints. An affected cousin had muscle hypotonia, lack of voluntary movements, bilateral hearing loss, generalized seizures, and severe psychomotor retardation. Liver and renal tests in both patients were normal. Urinary organic acid profiles were not reported. |Ostergaard et al. (2007) reported 10 patients from the Faroe Islands with encephalomyopathic mtDNA depletion associated with mild methylmalonic aciduria. The clinical phenotype comprised infantile-onset hypotonia, muscle atrophy, hyperkinesias, severe hearing impairment, postnatal growth retardation, and lactic acidosis. Most patients had scoliosis or kyphosis, recurrent airway infections, and required tube feeding due to swallowing difficulties. Neuroimaging showed demyelination and central and cortical atrophy; some patients fulfilled the criteria for Leigh syndrome. |Carrozzo et al. (2007) also reported 11 patients from 8 related families in the Faroe Islands with neonatal onset of encephalomyopathy. Ten of the patients were in the report of Ostergaard et al. (2007) (Chinnery, 2007). Affected patients had feeding problems since birth and showed failure to thrive. Other features included severe muscle hypotonia with progressive areflexia, profound motor developmental delay, and none learned to sit or stand without support. They had progressive neurologic deterioration from the age of 12 to 14 months, and developed a hyperkinetic-dystonic movement disorder with external ophthalmoplegia. All developed profound sensorineural deafness. One had seizures, 2 had polyneuropathy, 1 had mild cardiomyopathy, and 1 had renal tubular dysfunction. Six patients died as children due to infection. Brain MRI showed hyperintense lesions in the basal ganglia. Laboratory studies showed mild methylmalonic aciduria, methylglutaconic aciduria, increased urinary carnitine esters, increased lactic acid in blood and CSF, and combined deficiencies of mitochondrial respiratory chain enzymes. SUCLA2 activity and protein were decreased in patient muscle. |Carrozzo et al. (2007) reported 3 additional patients from southern Italy with a similar phenotype, including infantile onset of hypotonia and severely delayed development associated with deafness and dystonic posturing. |Jaberi et al. (2013) reported 2 Iranian cousins with early-onset encephalomyopathy. One was a 4-year-old girl with delayed motor milestones, failure to thrive due to poor feeding, severe hypotonia with an inability to walk, severe generalized dystonia, and hearing loss. The second child was a 10-year-old girl who first showed progressive problems in gait and dystonia around age 3 years. She also had hearing loss and severe bulbar dystonia. Brain MRI of both patients showed T2-weighted hyperintensities in the caudate and putamen. Laboratory studies in 1 patient showed increased lactate and succinylcarnitine, but methylmalonic acid levels were normal. Muscle tissue was not available for mtDNA analysis. |
500009::transient infantile mitochondrial myopathy is caused by mutation in the MTTE gene (590025), which is encoded by the mitochondrial genome.|Infantile mitochondrial myopathy due to reversible COX deficiency is a rare mitochondrial disorder characterized by onset in infancy of severe hypotonia and generalized muscle weakness associated with lactic acidosis, but is distinguished from other mitochondrial disorders in that affected individuals recover spontaneously after 1 year of age (summary by Mimaki et al., 2010). See also transient infantile liver failure (LFIT; 613070), which is a similar disorder.|Jerusalem et al. (1973) described a girl with profound weakness and hypotonia in all but the ocular muscles in the first months of life. She also had hyporeflexia, hepatomegaly, macroglossia, and slight elevation of muscle enzymes in serum. Muscle biopsy showed mild glycogen and marked lipid and mitochondrial excess. Subsequently, the child had normal intellectual and delayed motor development, and macroglossia disappeared. |DiMauro et al. (1983) reported a 2-week-old boy with profound generalized weakness, hypotonia, hyporeflexia, macroglossia, and severe lactic acidosis. He improved spontaneously; he held his head at 4.5 months, rolled over at 7 months, and walked by 16 months. At 33 months of age, he had mild proximal weakness, waddling gait, lumbar lordosis, pes planus, and areflexia. Cognitive development was normal. Blood lactic acid declined steadily and was normal by 14 months of age. Histochemical and ultrastructural studies of muscle biopsy specimens obtained at 1 and 7 months of age showed excessive mitochondria, lipid, and glycogen; a third biopsy at age 36 months showed only atrophy of scattered fibers. COX staining was positive in less than 5% of muscle fibers at the first biopsy, in approximately 60% of fibers at the second biopsy, and in all fibers at the third biopsy. Biochemical analysis showed an isolated defect of COX activity, at about 8% of control level at the first biopsy, increasing to 47% activity at the second biopsy, and higher than normal activity at the third biopsy. In contrast to the fatal infantile form of COX deficiency (see 220110 and 604377), the enzyme defect in this condition was reversible. DiMauro et al. (1983) noted the similarity to the patient reported by Jerusalem et al. (1973). |Zeviani et al. (1987) reported a 6-week-old boy with reversible COX deficiency who presented with failure to thrive, lactic acidosis, and severe generalized weakness and wasting of the limb, neck, and facial muscles. He required assisted ventilation due to hypotonia and muscle weakness. Laboratory studies showed increased serum lactate, pyruvate, creatine kinase, and triglycerides. At age 6 months, the lactic acidosis resolved, and the patient started to improve; assisted ventilation was discontinued at 15 months. Muscle biopsies at 4 and 11 months showed accumulation of mitochondria, lipid, and glycogen; COX activity was 11% of the lowest control at the first biopsy and 57% at the second. However, the second muscle biopsy showed severe fibrosis. At age 20 months, he had full range of motion, good head control, and improved muscle bulk, but still could not walk. |Salo et al. (1992) reported 2 sibs, born of nonconsanguineous parents, with a similar clinical course of reversible mitochondrial myopathy with COX deficiency. Within the first weeks of life, both presented with sucking and breathing difficulties due to profound hypotonia. Other features included hepatomegaly, increased serum creatine kinase, and lactic acidosis. Both improved gradually and were free of clinical symptoms at age 4 years and 28 months, respectively. Abnormal muscle findings during the acute phase of the disorder included ragged-red fibers, abnormal mitochondria, and reduced COX staining and activity. Salo et al. (1992) emphasized that early diagnosis is crucial to provide intensive treatment until spontaneous clinical improvement appears.|Horvath et al. (2009) reported 17 patients from 12 families with infantile mitochondrial myopathy due to reversible COX deficiency. All were white Caucasians from different ethnic groups. One family had 4 affected sibs. Age at onset ranged from birth to 12 weeks, and the clinical presentation included severe muscle weakness often requiring artificial ventilation and/or tube feeding. Only 1 child died of pneumonia at age 39 days; all other children recovered spontaneously between age 4 and 20 months; however, some had a mild residual myopathy. The study included patients previously reported by DiMauro et al. (1983), Zeviani et al. (1987), and Salo et al. (1992). |Mimaki et al. (2010) reported 8 Japanese patients, including 2 sibs, with infantile mitochondrial myopathy due to reversible COX deficiency. All had profound generalized muscle weakness and hypotonia with onset between birth and 3 months of age. Two had involvement of facial muscles with a high-arched palate. Recovery to a normal state during the 3-year follow-up occurred in all patients except 1, who had a slight delay in gross motor development. All had increased serum creatine kinase in infancy, which subsequently normalized. Two sibs had increased signals in the caudate and putamen on brain MRI, which the authors noted was a previously unreported finding. Muscle biopsies showed marked variation in fiber size and COX-negative ragged-red fibers, as well as decreased RNA levels of mitochondrial tRNA-Glu. However, the aminoacylation ratio of tRNA-Glu was normal. Biochemical studies of cybrids carrying the 14774T-C mutation (590025.0002) showed reduced levels of complexes I, III, and IV, whereas naive myoblasts showed normal respiratory chain enzyme activities and protein levels. The findings were significant in that multiple respiratory enzymes, not just COX, were affected by the mutation. Mimaki et al. (2010) postulated that nuclear factors that become apparent during muscle cell proliferation and/or differentiation may compensate for the mitochondrial defects. |Uusimaa et al. (2011) reported 5 patients from 4 families with transient acute infantile mitochondrial myopathy and lactic acidosis. Age at presentation ranged from birth to 4 months, but all had subtle symptoms of hypotonia and feeding difficulties from birth. Two patients also had transient cardiac impairment, 2 had respiratory impairment, and 2 had eye muscle weakness. Only 1 had hepatomegaly. All recovered over months or years, but all showed delayed walking and had persistent muscle weakness, fatigability, or myalgia. Facial weakness, ptosis, and a myopathic facial appearance became more prominent with age. In 2 families, the mother of the index case had mild to moderate myopathic features without the typical infantile presentation. Two patients and the mother of a patient developed hypothyroidism. Muscle biopsies showed ragged-red fibers, increased glycogen and lipids, decreased COX activity, and deficiency of other mitochondrial respiratory enzymes, which improved with age. |
610773::mitochondrial phosphate carrier deficiency can be caused by mutation in the SLC25A3 gene (600370).|Mayr et al. (2007) described 2 sisters, offspring of nonconsanguineous Turkish parents, with mitochondrial phosphate carrier deficiency. The younger sister presented at age 12 hours with cyanosis and muscular hypotonia that necessitated intensive care treatment. Echocardiography revealed hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with low cardiac output. Lactate was constantly elevated in plasma. Cardiac hypertrophy was progressive. Severe muscular hypotonia and failure to thrive persisted. At age 4 months, she died from heart failure. Histologic examination of a muscle biopsy showed lipid myopathy with lipid accumulation in both fiber types, prominent in type I fibers. The elder sister presented at age 10 hours with muscular hypotonia, respiratory distress, metabolic acidosis (pH 6.9), and lactic acidosis that necessitated intensive care treatment. Artificial ventilation was necessary for 3 months. She developed increasing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Metabolic workup revealed constantly elevated plasma lactate and an increased lactate:pyruvate ratio of 62. At age 9 months, she died from intractable low-output hypertrophic heart failure. |
614741::mitochondrial pyruvate carrier deficiency (MPYCD) is caused by homozygous mutation in the BRP44L gene (614738) on chromosome 6q27.|Mitochondrial pyruvate carrier deficiency is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder characterized by delayed psychomotor development and lactic acidosis with a normal lactate/pyruvate ratio resulting from impaired mitochondrial pyruvate oxidation (summary by Bricker et al., 2012). |Brivet et al. (2003) reported a girl, born of related Algerian parents, with a severe metabolic disorder resulting in death at age 19 months. At birth, she had respiratory distress, hepatomegaly, lactic acidosis, and transient hypoglycemia. Laboratory studies showed increased serum pyruvate and lactate, a normal lactate/pyruvate ratio, mildly increased ketone bodies, and excretion of organic acids. Although pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency (see, e.g., 312170) was suspected, treatment for that disorder did not result in clinical improvement and patient fibroblasts showed normal pyruvate dehydrogenase activity. The child had an encephalopathy, with severely delayed psychomotor development, rotary nystagmus, hypotonia, extensor plantar responses, and poor visual contact. She also had dysmorphic features, including progressive microcephaly, epicanthus, long philtrum, thin upper lip, and small inverted and widely spaced nipples. Studies of patient fibroblasts showed impaired production of citric acid cycle intermediates and impaired release of CO2 from pyruvate, whereas pyruvate showed normal oxidation in cells with a disrupted mitochondrial membrane or with increasing concentrations of pyruvate. The findings were consistent with a defect in pyruvate transport across the mitochondrial membrane. In a subsequent pregnancy, an affected fetus was recognized using an assay measuring pyruvate oxidation in trophoblasts. |Bricker et al. (2012) reported 3 patients from 2 additional consanguineous families with a similar, but less severe, disorder. Affected children had psychomotor retardation, with epilepsy in 1 family and peripheral neuropathy in the other. The patients were alive at 5 to 14 years of age. |
609015::mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency (MTPD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the genes encoding either the alpha (HADHA; 600890) or beta (HADHB; 143450) subunits of the mitochondrial trifunctional protein.|The mitochondrial trifunctional protein, composed of 4 alpha and 4 beta subunits, catalyzes 3 steps in mitochondrial beta-oxidation of fatty acids: long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD), long-chain enoyl-CoA hydratase, and long-chain thiolase activities. Trifunctional protein deficiency is characterized by decreased activity of all 3 enzymes. Clinically, classic trifunctional protein deficiency can be classified into 3 main clinical phenotypes: neonatal onset of a severe, lethal condition resulting in sudden unexplained infant death (SIDS; 272120), infantile onset of a hepatic Reye-like syndrome, and late-adolescent onset of primarily a skeletal myopathy (Spiekerkoetter et al., 2003). Some patients with MTP deficiency show a protracted progressive course associated with myopathy, recurrent rhabdomyolysis, and sensorimotor axonal neuropathy. These patients tend to survive into adolescence and adulthood (den Boer et al., 2003). See also isolated LCHAD deficiency (609016), which is caused by mutation in the HADHA gene.|Wanders et al. (1992) reported an infant, born of first-cousin parents, who presented with hypoglycemia and major hypotonia at 2 days of age. The infant developed respiratory failure and showed poor spontaneous motility and absence of suckling and archaic reflexes on day 8, had acute cardiac failure on day 28 related to a hypokinetic cardiomyopathy with distended wall, and died on day 30. Studies of fibroblasts from the patient demonstrated deficiency of all 3 activities of trifunctional protein. |Jackson et al. (1992) reported a young girl who presented with recurrent episodes of muscle weakness culminating in a severe attack of generalized muscle weakness. Muscle mitochondria from the patient demonstrated an abnormal pattern of intermediates of beta-oxidation with an accumulation of 3-hydroxyacyl- and 2-enoyl-CoA and carnitine esters, and 3-oxoacylcarnitines. The patient was shown to have a combined defect of long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase, long-chain 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase, and long-chain 2-enoyl-CoA hydratase. In fibroblasts from both parents, intermediate levels of enzyme activity were found. The proband died at age 4.5 years after a brief illness. An earlier-born brother had died at the age of 2.5 years, probably of the same disorder. He showed terminally low-output cardiac failure with an enlarged dilated heart and generalized weakness. |Dionisi-Vici et al. (1996) described the clinical course of a girl diagnosed at the age of 15 months with a history of recurrent vomiting at birth. The patient presented with severe hypotonia, respiratory failure requiring assisted ventilation, and severe dilated cardiomyopathy. Urine organic acids were strongly suggestive of a fatty acid oxidation defect by characteristic excretion of 3-hydroxydicarboxylic acid; additional laboratory findings were consistent with hypoparathyroidism. Fibroblast analysis showed that all 3 MTP enzyme activities were affected, albeit to different degrees. In follow-up, additional episodes of metabolic decompensation were induced by intercurrent febrile illnesses. |Den Boer et al. (2003) found that 9 (42%) of 21 patients with MTP deficiency presented with rapidly progressive clinical deterioration. Eight of these patients died of cardiac complications within 8 weeks; the ninth patient died of liver failure within 4 weeks. Six of the 9 had hypoketotic hypoglycemia. Other clinical features of the rapidly progressive group included hypotonia, lethargy, liver disease, and peripheral neuropathy. One of 7 tested had pigmentary retinopathy. Two patients who were diagnosed prenatally died despite treatment; 1 of these patients had hydrops fetalis. Two (11%) of 19 pregnancies on which information was available were complicated by HELLP syndrome (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelets). |Purevsuren et al. (2009) reported the clinical and molecular features of 5 Japanese patients with MTP deficiency, including 3 who had previously been reported. Two had an early lethal phenotype, 2 had an intermediate hepatic phenotype, and 1 had a late-onset myopathic phenotype. The first 2 patients had onset within the first days of life of lactic acidosis, hyperketotic hypoglycemia, and hyperammonemia. Both died of cardiac arrest at ages 8 days and 3 months, respectively. The 2 patients with hepatic involvement had onset at ages 9 and 13 months, respectively. Both had delayed psychomotor development. One had increased liver enzymes, lactic acidemia, and recurrent rhabdomyolysis. The other had lethargy, hypotonia, recurrent respiratory infections, and liver dysfunction. The last patient, previously reported by Miyajima et al. (1997), had onset at age 15 years of muscle pain and weakness associated with rhabdomyolysis. |Park et al. (2009) reported a Korean boy, born of unrelated parents, who presented at birth with severe metabolic acidosis, hypotension, oliguric renal failure, tachypnea, and decreased movements. Cardiac assessment showed left ventricular dilatation, cardiac dysfunction (ejection fraction of 25%), and mitral and tricuspid regurgitation. At age 5 days, he developed seizures. Laboratory studies showed increased lactate and ammonia and abnormal liver enzymes. Newborn screening tests showed abnormal accumulation of acylcarnitine species, and genetic analysis identified compound heterozygous mutations in the HADHB gene (143450.0008 and 143450.0009). The patient died of advanced cardiac failure at age 2 months. |MTP Deficiency with Myopathy and Neuropathy|Dionisi Vici et al. (1991) described slowly progressive neuropathy and recurrent myoglobinuria in a boy whose sister had died at the age of 3 years, presumably of the same disorder. |Schaefer et al. (1996) reported 3 adults from a family with symptoms of recurrent exercise-induced rhabdomyolysis associated with peripheral neuropathy. Investigation of fatty acid oxidation in the patients revealed a deficiency of the mitochondrial trifunctional enzyme of beta-oxidation. The patients appeared to represent a novel phenotype of MTP deficiency characterized by recurrent rhabdomyolysis and peripheral neuropathy, but without involvement of other organs. This phenotype was associated with prolonged survival beyond the fourth decade. A low-fat/high-carbohydrate diet proved beneficial in one of the patients, drastically reducing the frequency of rhabdomyolytic episodes. Schaefer et al. (1996) noted that MTP deficiency should be considered in patients with recurrent episodes of myoglobinuria and peripheral neuropathy presenting in later life. |Miyajima et al. (1997) reported a 23-year-old man with recurrent myoglobinuria, low muscle-free carnitine levels, and deficient fasting ketogenesis. Urinary organic acid analysis showed large amounts of C6-C14 3-hydroxydicarboxylic acids. The 3 activities of the mitochondrial trifunctional protein were markedly decreased, and the protein content was less than 2% of normal controls. Miyajima et al. (1997) concluded that MTP deficiency can also present in adolescence with recurrent myoglobinuria. |Den Boer et al. (2003) found that 12 (57%) of 21 patients with MTP deficiency presented with a slow, insidious disease characterized by hypotonia, muscle cramps, decreased tendon reflexes, and peripheral neuropathy. Other features included cardiomyopathy, liver disease, and feeding difficulties with failure to thrive. Seven of these patients died: 5 from progressive cardiomyopathy, 1 from severe infection and metabolic derangement, and 1 suddenly almost 14 years after onset. The 5 surviving patients were in relatively good clinical condition without cardiomyopathy. Three had developmental delay. Some had episodic rhabdomyolysis and/or myoglobinuria. |Naiki et al. (2014) reported a pair of Japanese dizygotic twins, born of consanguineous parents, with a protracted form of MTPD. The patients were 18 years old at the time of the report. Both presented in early infancy with hypoparathyroidism with severely decreased serum calcium and increased serum phosphorus; 1 infant had seizures as a result, whereas the other was asymptomatic. Both subsequently had episodic rhabdomyolysis associated with infections, and developed a progressive peripheral neuropathy resulting in difficulty walking. Other features included distal muscle weakness, hyporeflexia, distal sensory impairment, and decreased nerve conduction velocities. Muscle biopsies showed denervation atrophy. |Liewluck et al. (2013) reported a man who presented in his late forties with exercise-induced rhabdomyolysis and was found to have features of a mild sensorimotor axonal peripheral neuropathy affecting the lower limbs. Laboratory studies showed an abnormal acylcarnitine profile, suggesting a defect in HADHA activity, although patient cells were not available for study. Genetic analysis revealed compound heterozygous mutations in the HADHA gene (600890.0001 and 600890.0004). |
540000::MELAS syndrome can be caused by mutation in several genes, including MTTL1 (590050), MTTQ (590030), MTTH (590040), MTTK (590060), MTTC (590020), MTTS1 (590080), MTND1 (516000), MTND5 (516005), MTND6 (516006), and MTTS2 (590085). The most common mutation causing MELAS is a c.3243A-G transition in the MTTL1 gene (590050.0001) (summary by Malfatti et al., 2013). |MELAS syndrome, comprising mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes, is a genetically heterogeneous mitochondrial disorder with a variable clinical phenotype. The disorder is accompanied by features of central nervous system involvement, including seizures, hemiparesis, hemianopsia, cortical blindness, and episodic vomiting (Pavlakis et al., 1984; Montagna et al., 1988). |Other mitochondrial encephalomyopathies include Leigh syndrome (LS; 256000), Kearns-Sayre syndrome (KSS; 530000), MERRF syndrome (545000), and Leber optic atrophy (535000).|Goto et al. (1992) studied MELAS in 21 males and 19 females to characterize the clinical features and biochemical and muscle biopsy findings related to the 3243A-G transition in the MTTL1 gene (590050.0001). The most frequent symptom was episodic sudden headache with vomiting and convulsions, which in 80% of cases affected patients aged 5 to 15 years. They demonstrated the mtDNA mutation in 32 of the 40 patients but concluded that there were no clinical or pathologic differences between the patients with or without the mutation. |Latkany et al. (1999) reported the ocular findings in 4 family members with MELAS syndrome caused by the 3243A-G MTTL1 mutation (590050.0001). Findings included ophthalmoplegia, neurosensory deafness, reduced photopic and scotopic electroretinogram b-wave amplitudes, myopathy, and macular retinal pigment epithelial atrophy. |De Quick et al. (1991) described MELAS syndrome in 2 sisters in whom detailed workup, including muscle biopsy, was normal in the mother but in the father showed a myopathic pattern on EMG and ragged-red fibers on muscle biopsy. Whether coincidence or true transmission from the father was not clear. |In a sporadic case of MELAS syndrome, Ravn et al. (2001) identified a heteroplasmic mutation in the ND6 gene (14453G-A; 516006.0005). The patient was a 7-year-old girl with normal development until the age of 2 years. Between 2 and 3 years of age, she had episodes of vomiting followed by ketotic acidosis. She developed myoclonic epilepsy, general weakness, and ataxia with intermittent dystonia. Magnetic resonance scans showed cerebellar hypoplasia and multiple infarctions in both hemispheres. A muscle biopsy revealed lipid storage myopathy with normal mitochondria on electron microscopy. The patient developed episodes of lethargy, lactic acidosis, and alternating uniparesis. Ophthalmologic examination revealed no sign of atrophy of the optic nerve but abolished visual evoked potentials (VEP). The mother was healthy, with no history of a mitochondrial disorder. Mitochondrial enzyme analysis in the patient showed a decreased activity of complex I in muscle. Sequencing of the entire mtDNA, except part of the D loop, revealed heteroplasmy for the 14453G-A mutation in 82% of the mtDNA of the patient's muscle and 78% in blood. The mutation was not detected in the blood of the mother nor in 50 healthy controls. In addition to the 14453G-A mutation, Ravn et al. (2001) identified 2 other homoplasmic mutations in the mtDNA of their patient, 5628T-C in the MTTA gene (590000) and 13535A-G in the MTND5 gene (516005), which might have contributed to the observed decrease in activity of complex I and the severe phenotype of the patient. |Bataillard et al. (2001) reported an atypical case of MELAS syndrome associated with a 4332G-A mutation in the MTTQ gene (590030.0003). The patient was a 47-year-old male with sensorineural deafness since age 20 years, who presented with an acute stroke in the absence of cardiovascular disease. Although late onset and some neuroradiographic findings were atypical for MELAS, there were extensive basal ganglia calcifications and muscle COX activity was decreased with severely deficient fibers. The 4332G-A mutation was present in 81% of the patient's muscle mtDNA molecules, and absent from his mtDNA blood and skin cells. The mutation was not found in mtDNA blood cells from his mother and brother or in 300 controls. The authors emphasized the genetic heterogeneity of the MELAS syndrome. |In several affected members of 3-generation Sardinian kindred with a maternally inherited syndrome characterized by features of both MERRF and MELAS, Zeviani et al. (1993) identified a mutation in the MTTK gene (590060.0002). The relative amount of mutant mtDNA in muscle correlated with the severity of the clinical presentation. Clinical features included myoclonic epilepsy, neural deafness, ataxia, and stroke-like episodes. |Kisanuki et al. (2006) identified the common 3243A-G mutation in a 50-year-old man with onset of headaches and seizures associated with bitemporal lesions identified on brain MRI. Other clinical features included long-standing thin habitus, deafness, and diabetes. The authors noted the late onset of classic MELAS symptoms in this patient and suggested a low mitochondrial mutation load in the brain. |Kaufmann et al. (2006) found that 23 (77%) of 30 MELAS patients ranging in age from 10 to 60 years had abnormal peripheral nerve conduction measures. All patients had the common MTTL1 3243A-G mutation (590050.0001). Although only 15 (50%) had outright clinical symptoms of peripheral neuropathy such as imbalance, paresthesias, and numbness, almost all (29 of 30) had abnormal findings on neurologic exam, including reflex testing, sensory exam, distal muscle strength testing, and gait. Nerve conduction tests showed pure sensory anomalies in 10 patients, pure motor anomalies in 5, and a mixed pattern in 8. Twelve patients had axonal neuropathy, 4 demyelinating, and 7 mixed. Lower extremities were more commonly affected (19 of 23) than upper extremities. Twelve patients with abnormal conduction studies had either abnormal fasting glucose levels or increased thyrotropin levels. Kaufmann et al. (2006) concluded that peripheral nerve abnormalities in patients with MELAS are common and likely reflect the high energy demand of the nervous system. |In a questionnaire-based survey, Parsons et al. (2010) found that 28 (80%) of 35 patients with MELAS due to the 3243A-G mutation (590050.0001) and 33 (62%) of 53 carrier relatives reported autonomic symptoms compared to 2 (12%) of 16 controls. Gastrointestinal symptoms, orthostatic dizziness, and cold or discolored hands and feet were the most common complaints among mutation carriers. |Testai and Gorelick (2010) reviewed the pathophysiology of stroke in patients with MELAS. Although the etiology is not completely explained, there is likely a role for mitochondrial angiopathy, vascular dysfunction, and hyperemia, as well as mitochondrial-mediated cytopathic mechanisms, which may result in energy failure. Neuronal hyperexcitability may also play a role. |In a retrospective study, Malfatti et al. (2013) found that 38 of 41 individuals with the MTTL1 c.3243A-G mutation had symptoms consistent with MELAS, whereas 3 were asymptomatic. The symptomatic patients had onset between 24 and 40 years of variable features, including sensorineural deafness, myopathy, cognitive impairment, neuropathy, ophthalmoplegia, diabetes, and stroke-like episodes. Cardiac investigations identified left ventricular hypertrophy and/or left ventricular dysfunction in 18 patients, along with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome in 7, conduction system disease in 4, and atrial fibrillation in 1. Over a median 5-year follow-up period, 11 patients died, including 3 due to heart failure. Seven patients had life-threatening adverse events, including 6 hospitalizations for severe heart failure and 1 resuscitated cardiac arrest. One patient had a heart transplant. Malfatti et al. (2013) concluded that, after central neurologic disease, cardiac disease has the greatest impact on prognosis in patients with the c.3243A-G mutation. Left ventricular hypertrophy was the only independent prognostic risk factor for adverse cardiac events, suggesting that these patients should be closely monitored. The severity of cardiac disease and adverse events did not correlate with mutation load in blood or urine or with ragged-red fibers on muscle biopsy. |Melone et al. (2004) reported a 20-year-old man who experienced sudden migrainous headache and vomiting, followed by left hemiparesis and lateral homonymous hemianopia. Seizures also occurred. The clinical picture was consistent with MELAS syndrome. At age 25 years, he developed myoclonus and ataxia, suggesting MERRF syndrome. His mother had shown similar stroke-like episodes and had died at age 36 years. Muscle biopsy of the proband showed abnormal mitochondrial proliferation and COX-negative fibers. Genetic analysis identified a heteroplasmic mutation in the MTTH gene (590040.0003). |Kirby et al. (2004) reported 3 unrelated patients with MELAS syndrome in whom the common 3243A-G mutation of the MTTL1 gene (590050.0001) could not be detected, but who expressed a specific deficiency of complex I activity in both skeletal muscle and cultured fibroblasts. Targeted sequencing of the mitochondrial tRNA and MTND genes showed that each patient harbored a different mutation in the MTND1 subunit gene of complex I (590050.0012-590050.0014, respectively).|
252150::molybdenum cofactor deficiency of complementation group A (MOCODA) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the MOCS1 gene (603707) on chromosome 6p21.|Molybdenum cofactor deficiency (MOCOD) is a rare autosomal recessive metabolic disorder characterized by onset in infancy of poor feeding, intractable seizures, and severe psychomotor retardation. Characteristic biochemical abnormalities include decreased serum uric acid and increased urine sulfite levels due to the combined enzymatic deficiency of xanthine dehydrogenase (XDH; 607633) and sulfite oxidase (SUOX; 606887), both of which use molybdenum as a cofactor. Most affected individuals die in early childhood (summary by Reiss, 2000; Reiss et al., 2011). |See also MOCOD, complementation group B (MOCODB; 252160), caused by mutation in the MOCS2 gene (602708) on chromosome 5q11; and MOCOD, complementation group C (MOCODC; 615501), caused by mutation in the GPHN gene (603930) on chromosome 14q24.|Duran et al. (1978) reported a female infant with a combination of sulfite oxidase deficiency (272300) and xanthine oxidase deficiency (278300). She presented at age 10 days with poor feeding, tonic-clonic seizures, EEG abnormalities, and dysmorphic features, including frontal bossing, asymmetry of the skull, and subtle medio-facial dysplasia. She also had nystagmus, enophthalmos, and dislocated lenses. Laboratory studies showed low serum uric acid, and urinary analysis showed increased excretion of xanthine, hypoxanthine, S-sulfocysteine, and taurine. At age 14 months, she was noted to have excretion of xanthine stones. At age 2 years, she had poor head control, hypertonia, no reaction to light, and essentially no psychomotor development. Xanthine oxidase activity was demonstrated to be absent in patient cells, but sulfite oxidase activity was difficult to determine. However, the excretion of sulfur-containing metabolites was consistent with decreased sulfite oxidase activity. Serum molybdenum concentration was normal. Johnson et al. (1980) reported further studies on the patient reported by Duran et al. (1978), who was bedridden and had not achieved any milestones by age 3 years. Hepatic tissue from the patient showed deficient activities of both sulfite oxidase and xanthine dehydrogenase, secondary to deficient synthesis of the molybdenum cofactor. Molybdenum was absent in the liver sample despite normal serum levels of the metal; however, the active molybdenum cofactor was not detectable in the liver. The clinical features were attributed mainly to the deficiency of sulfite oxidase; urinary xanthine stones were presumably the only manifestation of the xanthine oxidase deficiency. There was also indirect biochemical evidence of aldehyde oxidase (AOX1; 602841) deficiency. Johnson et al. (1980) concluded that the patient had a primary defect in an essential step of the biosynthesis of the active molybdenum cofactor. |Beemer (1981) identified this disorder in a second patient, a male newborn, whose parents were born in the same region of Holland as the parents of the first patient, with at least 2 links between the pedigrees. By 1983, according to Wadman et al. (1983), there were more cases of sulfite oxidase deficiency due to a defect in the molybdenum cofactor than cases of isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency. Convulsions, feeding difficulties, mental retardation, and lens dislocation occurred in both the isolated and the combined forms. In the combined form, abnormal muscle tone, myoclonic spasms, and an abnormal physiognomy had also been reported.|Endres et al. (1988) reported a newborn infant with seizures and spastic tetraparesis at the age of 1 week who excreted excessive amounts of sulfite, taurine, S-sulfocysteine and thiosulfate, characteristic of sulfite oxidase deficiency. In addition, increased renal excretion of xanthine and hypoxanthine combined with a low serum and urinary uric acid was consistent with xanthine dehydrogenase deficiency. Both deficiencies were established at the enzyme level. Attempts at treatment were unsuccessful. The patient developed a severe neurologic syndrome, brain atrophy, and lens dislocation, and died at the age of 22 months. |Slot et al. (1993) reported 2 unrelated patients with MOCOD who presented with neonatal convulsions. The parents in one case were second cousins. One infant died at the age of 10 days and was found to have severe loss of neocortical neurons, predominantly affecting the deeper layers, well-established gliosis of the white matter, and areas of cystic lysis in the white matter. In the case of the second infant, death occurred at the age of about 1 year. Postmortem examination, like clinical examination, disclosed no lens luxation. |Parini et al. (1997) described a patient with molybdenum cofactor deficiency in which lens dislocation developed late (at the age of 8 years) and was preceded by bilateral spherophakia. The authors hypothesized that the cause of spherophakia in this disorder is an abnormal relaxation of the zonular fibers, which eventually causes lens dislocation. |Patients with MOCOD have recognizable dysmorphic facial features, including long face with puffy cheeks, widely spaced eyes, elongated palpebral fissures, thick lips, long philtrum, and small nose. Some patients develop progressive microcephaly, whereas others have macrocephaly secondary to hydrocephalus. Neuropathologic findings include brain atrophy, neuronal loss, astrocytic gliosis, cystic changes in the subcortical white matter, thin corpus callosum, enlarged ventricles, and demyelination (summary by Johnson and Duran, 2001).|Mechler et al. (2015) reported a natural history of molybdenum cofactor deficiency with pooled data. Of 82 children, 70% were classified as MOCD not otherwise specified because the molecular basis was not known; 15% were MOCODA, 10% were MOCODB, and 6% were MOCODC. In this cohort, 42% were female, 45% were male, and 13% were of unknown sex. Affected sibs were present in 38%, absent in 60%, and unknown in 2%. At last follow-up, 51% were alive and 49% had died. The median survival overall was 36 months. The initial cardinal disease features at onset were seizures (72%) as well as feeding difficulties (25%) and hypotonia (11%). In addition, developmental delay (9%), hemiplegia (2%), lens dislocation (2%), and hyperreflexia (1%) were reported. Reported median age of onset of the disease was the first day of life; the median age at diagnosis was 4.5 months. The median time to diagnosis (diagnostic delay) was 89 days. |
616095::monocarboxylate transporter-1 deficiency is caused by homozygous or heterozygous mutation in the MCT1 gene (SLC16A1; 600682) on chromosome 1p13.|Van Hasselt et al. (2014) reported a girl, the second child of consanguineous Syrian parents, who presented at 3.5 months of age with respiratory distress due to a viral upper respiratory-tract infection. Blood gas analysis revealed profound metabolic acidosis (pH of 6.88, base excess of -28 mmol/L, and an elevated anion gap of 33 mmol/L). After receiving sodium bicarbonate and intravenous glucose, she recovered rapidly. Cardiac ultrasound showed a hemodynamically insignificant type II atrial septum defect and a hypoplastic left pulmonary artery. Bronchoscopy identified hypoplasia and malacia of the main left bronchus. Cerebral ultrasound showed increased echogenicity of both caudate and lentiform nuclei. Borderline microcephaly was observed, and developmental delay subsequently became evident. Van Hasselt et al. (2014) also studied 8 other patients with monocarboxylate transporter 1 deficiency. All patients presented with bouts of ketoacidosis provoked by fasting or infections in the first years of life. Ketoacidotic episodes were preceded by poor feeding and vomiting and were associated with dehydration, which was a consequence of osmotic diuresis and vomiting. In all patients, treatment with intravenous glucose or dextrose, combined with bicarbonate, led to rapid clearance of metabolic acidosis. Early initiation of treatment appeared to prevent ketoacidosis, and ensuring adequate caloric intake reduced the number of episodes. The frequency of ketoacidotic episodes appeared to decrease over time, and none of the patients had documented ketoacidosis after 7 years of age, although some patients had marked ketonuria associated with mild infections. |
253000::mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA (MPS4A; Morquio syndrome A) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the GALNS gene (612222), which encodes galactosamine-6-sulfate sulfatase, on chromosome 16q24.|See MPS IVB (MPS4B; 253010), also known as Morquio syndrome B, a genetically distinct disorder with overlapping clinical features caused by mutation in the beta-galactosidase gene (GLB1; 611458) on chromosome 3p22.|Mucopolysaccharidosis type IVA is an autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease characterized by intracellular accumulation of keratan sulfate and chondroitin-6-sulfate. Key clinical features include short stature, skeletal dysplasia, dental anomalies, and corneal clouding. Intelligence is normal and there is no direct central nervous system (CNS) involvement, although the skeletal changes may result in neurologic complications. There is variable severity, but patients with the severe phenotype usually do not survive past the second or third decade of life (Montano et al., 2008). |McKusick (1972) noted that between 1929 and 1959, a miscellany of skeletal disorders was included in the Morquio category, including various types of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (see, e.g., 183900) and multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (see, e.g., 132400).|Nelson et al. (1988) proposed the division of MPS IVA into 3 subgroups: severe classic, intermediate, and mild, reflecting clinical variability observed in 12 enzymatically proven cases. Those who were only mildly affected showed a relatively high residual enzyme activity. |The first cases of Morquio syndrome were likely reported in a French Canadian brother and sister by Osler (1897) as cases of achondroplasia (ACH; 100800) (see McKusick, 1972, p 583, fig 11-23).|Morquio (1929) in Montevideo, Uruguay, and Brailsford (1929) in Birmingham, England, simultaneously and independently described the entity now known to result from a deficiency of galactosamine-6-sulfatase. Morquio (1929) observed the disorder in 4 sibs in a family of Swedish extraction. Notable features included osseous dystrophy, corneal clouding, aortic valve disease, and urinary excretion of keratosulfate.|Greenberg (1968) noted that the dangerous complications of atlantoaxial dislocation due to hypoplasia of the odontoid can occur in Morquio disease and in various forms of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. |Gadbois et al. (1973) identified 48 patients from 27 families with Morquio syndrome in the province of Quebec. Total urinary excretion of keratan sulfate was increased 2 to 3 times that of normal, while urinary excretion of total mucopolysaccharide was within normal limits. |Hussels (1974) described an affected woman who had 2 normal children. Her brother was also affected.|Guiney and Stevenson (1982) described a woman with documented Morquio syndrome due to deficiency of N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfate sulfatase who survived to the age of 67 years. After suffering for several days from episodes of unexplained and episodic apnea, she was found dead in bed.|Hecht et al. (1984) reported a 14-year-old boy with a very mild form of Morquio syndrome who presented as having nonresolving bilateral Legg-Perthes disease. He had short stature (15th percentile for height) and a short trunk, but did not have pectus carinatum, genu valgum, excessive joint laxity, corneal clouding, or facial changes. Radiographic studies showed mild platyspondyly, anterior wedging of the first lumbar vertebra, and minimal odontoid hypoplasia, as well as abnormal capital femoral epiphyses. N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfate sulfatase activity was undetectable in leukocytes and low in fibroblasts. Urine keratan sulfate was increased at 22.9 mg/total volume (normal less than 2 mg/total volume). Together with the cases of Fujimoto and Horwitz (1983) and 2 cases of Holzgreve et al. (1981), this experience suggested the existence of a mild form of MPS IVA.|Beck et al. (1986) suggested that there are severe, intermediate, and mild forms of N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfate (GalNAc-6-S) sulfatase deficiency. They described a 30-year-old man who was 156 cm tall and had severe hip disease, fine corneal deposits by slit-lamp, and a wedge-shaped first lumbar vertebra. Although there was no increase in urinary keratosulfate, GALNS activity was markedly decreased in fibroblasts. The authors noted the similarities to so-called 'nonkeratosulfate-excreting Morquio syndrome' (252300), which may be a variant of Morquio A. |In all of 12 patients with MPS IVA, Nelson and Thomas (1988) found odontoid dysplasia in the absence or presence of atlanto-axial instability. In general, the findings correlated well with the overall clinical severity of the condition. The authors emphasized the importance of careful follow-up of these patients for symptoms or signs of cervical cord compression. Proven compromise of the upper cervical cord would be an indication for posterior fusion of the upper cervical spine. |Montano et al. (2008) developed growth curves based on data from 354 patients with Morquio A disease. The mean birth lengths of boys and girls were 52.6 and 52.1 cm, respectively. The mean final heights for males and females at 18 years and older were 122.4 and 113.1 cm, respectively, which corresponded to -7.4 SD for males and -7.7 SD for females compared to controls. The mean body mass index for males and females at or over 18 years of age was 24.7 and 25.6 kg/m(2), respectively. The growth pattern in Morquio A patients was characterized by impaired growth velocity after 1 year of age. |Harmatz et al. (2015) performed a longitudinal analysis of endurance and respiratory function from a natural history study of patients with Morquio A syndrome. The authors used a 6-minute walk test and a 3-minute stair climb test as well as measuring respiratory evaluation by forced vital capacity (FVC) and maximum voluntary ventilation (MVV). At year 0 (baseline), 353 subjects were assessed; at year 1, 184; and at year 2, 78. The overall annualized estimate of change in the 6-minute walk test distance was -4.86 +/- 3.25 m. In contrast, little change (-0.14 +/- 0.60 stairs/min) was observed in the 3-minute stair climb test. Annualized changes in FVC and MVV were 2.44 +/- 0.68% and 1.01 +/- 2.38%, respectively. FVC and MVV increased in patients less than 14 years of age, but decreased in older patients. |Caciotti et al. (2015) reported the clinical data, biochemical assays, molecular analyses, and in silico structural analyses of mutations in 37 MPS IVA patients. Thirty-one patients had the severe phenotype, 3 were intermediate, and 3 were mild. The phenotypic features of the patients were reported in the supplemental material for this paper. |
254500::several chromosome aberrations, including recurrent translocations and deletions, have been found to be related to the development or progression of multiple myeloma; see CYTOGENETICS section.|Multiple myeloma is a neoplastic plasma cell disorder characterized by clonal proliferation of malignant plasma cells in the bone marrow microenvironment, monoclonal protein in the blood or urine, and associated organ dysfunction (Palumbo and Anderson, 2011). |Leoncini and Korngold (1964) described multiple myeloma in 2 sisters and reviewed the literature on familial cases. Manson (1961) reported affected sisters, one of whom also had pernicious anemia. Myeloma has also been observed in father and son (Nadeau et al., 1956). Thomas (1964) observed myeloma in a brother and sister. Alexander and Benninghoff (1965) described 3 affected black sibs. Whitehouse (1971) observed affected brother and sister. |In a large population survey in Sweden, Axelsson and Hallen (1965) found 2 families, one with 2 and one with 3 sibs, showing high monoclonal (M)-component. In a third family, 2 persons with high M-component were more remotely related. These 7 were from a total group of 59 (out of 7,918) found to have M-component. Their condition was considered to be a variety of essential benign monoclonal hypergammaglobulinemia. |Berlin et al. (1968) described familial occurrence of M-components. One possible explanation for familial paraproteinemia is that plasma cell clones with similar structural genes for the paraprotein synthesized by these cells proliferate in related individuals. This hypothesis predicts that paraproteins from 2 members of the same family would be identical. The paraproteins of a mother with multiple myeloma and a son with probably benign monoclonal gammopathy were isolated by Grant et al. (1971). Light chains were of the lambda type, but had differences on peptide map in both the common and variable regions of the proteins. These data showed that the structural genes operative in paraprotein light chain production in these first-degree relatives are different. The presence of a genetic basis was suggested by the occurrence of 2 different monoclonal gammopathies in 1 patient. Humphrey (1973) described a patient who had an intracranial plasmacytoma that was surgically removed. Six years later she developed a plasmacytoma of 1 kidney. The second tumor produced a different gamma globulin from that released into the cerebrospinal fluid by the brain plasmacytoma. |Zawadzki et al. (1977) described 19 cases of familial immunopathy, distributed in 9 families. Ten members of 5 families had multiple myeloma, 5 members of 2 families had lanthanic paraproteinemia, and 4 members of 2 families had one or the other of these. 'Lanthanic' is from a Greek word meaning 'to escape.' It is used in place of 'benign' because malignant immunocytic dyscrasia has been known to emerge. The term is intended to convey that the condition was asymptomatic and came to attention only by serendipity. (Actually, in the course of a specific study of relatives of clinically affected probands, this is not serendipity; Walpole's Prince of Serendip set out to find one thing and instead found something else (Cannon, 1945).) |Blattner (1980) gave an excellent review, with a classification of monoclonal gammopathies. Multiple myeloma and Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia (153600) are presumably closely related; both are malignant monoclonal gammopathies. Multiple myeloma is about 2 times more frequent in U.S. blacks than in US whites; it is the eleventh and twentieth most frequent malignancy in the 2 races, respectively.|Horwitz et al. (1985) reported 3 affected sibs and stated that a review of the literature revealed reports of 38 affected pairs of sibs, 8 families with 3 affected sibs, and 4 families with another affected relative (in addition to the pair of affected sibs). Comotti et al. (1987) and Judson et al. (1985) reported identical twins concordant for multiple myeloma. |Jensen et al. (1988) described a brother and sister with progressive mixed axonal and demyelinating polyneuropathy in association with a monoclonal IgM gammopathy of kappa and lambda type, respectively. Sera from both patients contained antibodies directed to bovine peripheral nerve myelin as determined by ELISA technique and to normal human peripheral nerve myelin as demonstrated by indirect immunofluorescence histochemistry. These sibs may have had a genetic predisposition to the formation of autoantibodies with peripheral nerve myelin as the target. |Deshpande et al. (1998) described 5 families in which plasma cell dyscrasia occurred in parent and child generations (6 such pairs), and pooled data with those of 16 other families (with 20 parent-child pairs affected) recorded in the literature. In all 6 previously unreported parent-child pairs with plasma cell dyscrasia and in 18 of 20 such pairs found in the literature, the disease occurred at an earlier age in the child generation. The median age of onset of myeloma in parent and child generations of all 26 pairs was 71 years and 50 years, respectively. The ages of onset of malignant plasma cell dyscrasias in the parent and child generations of these families compared with patients in the general population was significantly different for the child generation but not for the parent generation. It thus appears that anticipation occurs in familial myeloma. |Grosbois et al. (1999) studied 15 families with 2 or more cases of multiple myeloma. In 10 of the 15, myeloma was observed in sibs, in whom the mean age at diagnosis was similar to that in unrelated multiple myeloma cases. In those families with multiple myeloma in successive generations, the mean age at diagnosis was lower. The monoclonal component was identical (IgG kappa) in 7 families. A family history of monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance was observed in 3 families. Five other prospective studies of 1,263 patients identified 4 affected families (3.2 per 1,000 cases of multiple myeloma). |Lynch et al. (2008) reported a large African American family in which 5 individuals had multiple myeloma, 3 had monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS), i.e., without signs of malignant lymphocytic or plasmocytic disease, and 5 had prostate cancer. One additional member had pancreatic cancer. The putative progenitor had died of colon cancer at age 88 years. |AL amyloidosis, formerly called primary amyloidosis, is a protein conformation disorder associated with a clonal plasma cell dyscrasia (Falk et al., 1997). Multiple organ disease results from the extracellular deposition of monoclonal immunoglobulin light chain fragments in an abnormal insoluble fibrillar form. AL amyloidosis may be associated with myeloma or other B-cell malignancy, but in most cases the underlying plasma cell dyscrasia is subtle and nonproliferating, analogous to MGUS (Guidelines Working Group of UK Myeloma Forum, 2004). |Gertz et al. (1986) reported primary immunoglobulin-related amyloidosis in 2 members of each of 3 families: 2 brothers, a brother and a sister, and 2 first cousins. Primary amyloidosis of this type may be closely akin to multiple myeloma and to Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia. |Miliani et al. (1996) described 3 Italian sibs (2 brothers and a sister) with immunoglobulin-related amyloidosis. Systemic amyloidosis was associated with monoclonal gammopathy in all 3. One of the sibs had Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia, whereas the other 2 had no evidence of multiple myeloma or related diseases. All 3 sibs showed a common pattern of polyneuropathy to different degrees; 2 presented a sicca syndrome and 1 also suffered from nephropathy. |Dispenzieri et al. (2004) concluded that high-dose chemotherapy with peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (PBSCT) in AL patients is associated with higher response rates and higher overall survival than standard chemotherapy. Their conclusion was based on a matched case-control study comparing overall survival of 63 AL patients undergoing transplantation with 63 patients not undergoing transplantation. |
126200::susceptibility to multiple sclerosis-1 (MS1) is associated with variation in certain HLA genes on chromosome 6p21, including HLA-A (142800), HLA-DRB1 (142857), HLA-DQB1 (604305), HLA-DRA (142860), on chromosome 6p21.3.|An HLA-DRB1*1501-DQB1*0602 haplotype (HLA-DR15) has been repeatedly demonstrated in high-risk populations of northern European descent.|Additional MS susceptibility loci include MS2 (612594) on chromosome 10p15, MS3 (612595) on chromosome 5p13, MS4 (612596) on chromosome 1p36, and MS5 (614810), influenced by variation in the TNFRSF1A gene (191190) on chromosome 12p13.|Svejgaard (2008) provided a detailed review of the immunogenetics of multiple sclerosis, with special emphasis on the association with HLA molecules. |
146500::susceptibility to multiple system atrophy-1 (MSA1) can be conferred by heterozygous, homozygous, or compound heterozygous mutation in the COQ2 gene (609825) on chromosome 4q21.|Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a distinct clinicopathologic entity that manifests as a progressive adult-onset neurodegenerative disorder causing parkinsonism, cerebellar ataxia, and autonomic, urogenital, and pyramidal dysfunction in various combinations. Two main subtypes are recognized: 'subtype C,' characterized predominantly by cerebellar ataxia, and 'subtype P,' characterized predominantly by parkinsonism. MSA is characterized pathologically by the degeneration of striatonigral and olivopontocerebellar structures and glial cytoplasmic inclusions (GCIs) that consist of abnormally phosphorylated alpha-synuclein (SNCA; 163890) or tau (MAPT; 157140) (Gilman et al., 1998; Gilman et al., 2008; Scholz et al., 2009). 'Subtype C' of MSA has been reported to be more prevalent than 'subtype P' in the Japanese population (65-67% vs 33-35%), whereas 'subtype P' has been reported to be more prevalent than 'subtype C' in Europe (63% vs 34%) and North America (60% vs 13%, with 27% of cases unclassified) (summary by The Multiple-System Atrophy Research Collaboration, 2013). |MSA is similar clinically and pathologically to Parkinson disease (PD; 168600) and Lewy body dementia (127750). See also PARK1 (168601), which is specifically caused by mutation in the SNCA gene.|Pure autonomic failure manifests as orthostatic hypotension and other autonomic abnormalities without other neurologic involvement. Although there is some phenotypic overlap, the relationship of pure autonomic failure to MSA is unclear (Vanderhaeghen et al., 1970; Schatz, 1996). |MSA typically shows onset in middle age. Parkinsonian features include bradykinesia, rigidity, postural instability, hypokinetic speech, and tremor; response to L-DOPA is poor. Cerebellar dysfunction includes gait ataxia, dysarthria, and disorders of extraocular movement. Autonomic insufficiency results in orthostatic hypotension, erectile dysfunction, constipation, and decreased sweating. Urinary symptoms include urgency, frequency, incomplete bladder emptying, nocturia, and incontinence. Less commonly, corticospinal dysfunction may manifest as hyperreflexia (Gilman et al., 1998). |Shy and Drager (1960) described a syndrome of adult-onset orthostatic hypotension, bladder and bowel incontinence, anhidrosis, iris atrophy, amyotrophy, ataxia, rigidity and tremor; intellect was unaffected. |Vanderhaeghen et al. (1970) reported a 71-year-old woman with severe orthostatic hypotension and urinary incontinence. A year later, she developed parkinsonism, amyotrophy of the small hand muscles, and hyperreflexia. She died following cardiopulmonary complications. Neuropathologic examination showed pallor of the substantia nigra, neuronal rarefaction, and cytoplasmic hyaline inclusions. An unrelated male patient, with a history of radiotherapy to the neck, presented at age 73 with orthostatic hypotension. He had absence of ankle reflexes, but no ataxia or extrapyramidal signs. After death, postmortem exam showed increased microglia and concentric hyaline bodies within some neurons. Vanderhaeghen et al. (1970) concluded that there are 2 forms of orthostatic hypotension: one accompanied by neurologic features consistent with MSA, and another devoid of additional neurologic signs. |Wullner et al. (2004) reported a German mother and daughter with probable MSA. The mother presented at age 68 with akinetic parkinsonism that responded to L-DOPA treatment for 7 years. She later developed urinary incontinence and orthostatic hypotension, as well as gait ataxia. At age 77, she had severe ataxia, dysarthria, smooth expressionless face, brisk tendon reflexes, and cogwheel rigidity. The daughter presented at age 46 with gait ataxia. Within 2 years, she developed urge incontinence, orthostatic dysfunction, and mild unilateral parkinsonism. Other features included limb ataxia, dysarthria, and mild cogwheel rigidity. Neither patient had cognitive impairment. Brain MRI of both patients showed brainstem and cerebellar atrophy. Single photon emission CT (SPECT) of both patients showed asymmetric massive reduction of presynaptic dopamine transporter and a moderate loss of dopamine D2 receptors (DRD2; 126450). Wullner et al. (2004) noted that whereas MSA is usually considered to be a sporadic disorder, their family suggested a rare instance of autosomal dominant inheritance. Wullner et al. (2009) reported postmortem examination of the German mother with MSA described by Wullner et al. (2004). The brain showed severe atrophy of the putamen, depigmentation of the substantia nigra, and pontine and cerebellar atrophy. Microscopic analysis showed profound neuronal loss and gliosis in the striatum, globus pallidus, substantia nigra, pontine nuclei, and inferior olivary nuclei, as well as marked loss of Purkinje cells and demyelination of cerebellar white matter. There were widespread SNCA-positive cytoplasmic inclusions. The neuropathologic findings confirmed the diagnosis of MSA. |Hara et al. (2007) reported 4 unrelated Japanese families in each of which 2 sibs had findings consistent with MSA. One of the families was consanguineous, suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance. Among the 8 patients, 1 had definite MSA, 5 had probable MSA, and 2 had possible MSA. The mean age at onset was 65.9 years. The most frequent clinical feature was parkinsonism, observed in 5 patients. All had a poor response to L-DOPA treatment. Six patients showed pontine atrophy with 'cross sign' or 'slitlike' signal changes at the posterolateral pontine margin on brain MRI. The patterns were consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance. No mutations were found in several genes for hereditary ataxia or in the SNCA gene. |
607948::susceptibility to Mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB) is associated with variation in many genes. Case-control studies in areas of endemic TB have pointed to variation in the HLA (see 142800), NRAMP1 (600266), vitamin D receptor (VDR; 601769), mannose-binding protein (MBL2; 154545), and cytokine-inducible SH2-containing protein (CISH; 602441) genes as contributing to TB susceptibility (Mitsos et al., 2003, Khor et al., 2010). Variation in the CD209 (604672) and MCP1 (CCL2; 158105) genes is also associated with TB susceptibility. TB susceptibility loci have been mapped to chromosome 2q35 (MTBS1; 607949), near NRAMP1, and to chromosomes 8q12-q13 (MTBS2; 611046) and 20q13.31-q33 (MTBS3; 612929). X-linked susceptibility to TB has also been suggested (MTBSX; 300259). Protection against TB has been associated with SNPs in the TIRAP (606252), IFNG (147570), and IFNGR1 (107470) genes. |Mycobacterium tuberculosis latently infects approximately one-third of humanity and is comparable only to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV; see 609423) as a leading infectious cause of mortality worldwide. Obstacles for controlling TB infection include lengthy treatment regimens of 6 to 9 months, drug resistance, lack of a highly efficacious vaccine, and incomplete understanding of the factors that control infectivity and disease progression. Although only 10% of individuals infected with M. tuberculosis develop active disease, the immune responses associated with TB susceptibility or resistance are not known. In addition, it is not known why some individuals have disseminated TB that spreads to the meninges and central nervous system, while most people have localized disease in the lungs. A number of studies suggest that host genetic factors influence susceptibility and resistance to TB (review by Berrington and Hawn, 2007). |
102770::The AMPD1 gene encodes myoadenylate deaminase, the skeletal muscle isoform of adenosine monophosphate deaminase (AMPD; EC 3.5.4.6), which catalyzes the deamination of AMP to IMP and plays an important role in the purine nucleotide cycle (summary by Morisaki et al., 1992). |In mammals, AMPD is encoded by a multigene family: AMPD2 (102771) encodes the L (liver) isoform, and AMPD3 (102772) encodes the E (erythrocyte) isoform.|
545000::this syndrome represents a phenotype that can be produced by mutation in more than 1 mitochondrial gene, e.g., MTTK (590060), MTTL1 (590050), MTTH (590040), MTTS1 (590080), MTTS2 (590085), MTTF (590070). Features of the MERRF syndrome have also been associated with mutation in the MTND5 gene (516005).|Fukuhara et al. (1980) provided an early report of myoclonic epilepsy associated with ragged-red fibers (MERRF). For detailed clinical features, see MOLECULAR GENETICS |
212160::Carnitine (beta-hydroxy-gamma-trimethylaminobutyric acid) is an essential cofactor for transport of long chain fatty acids across mitochondrial membranes, permitting beta-oxidation. Carnitine in body fluids is derived from the diet or biosynthesis and is actively transported into muscle. Two biochemically and clinically distinct disorders cause low concentrations of carnitine in skeletal muscle. Systemic carnitine deficiency (212140) shows low carnitine in the liver and/or plasma. In muscle carnitine deficiency, lipid storage myopathy occurs with low muscle carnitine but normal liver and serum carnitine. Cases were reported by Engel and Angelini (1973), Markesbery et al. (1974), VanDyke et al. (1975), and others. In the patient reported by Engel and Angelini (1973), addition of carnitine to muscle homogenate repaired fatty acid oxidation, suggesting that carnitine transport into muscle was impaired. Hosking et al. (1977) reported benefit of oral carnitine therapy. In the patient reported by Willner et al. (1979), carnitine treatment did not repair the defect and transport of carnitine into muscle was normal. This and some other patients with lipid storage myopathy responded to corticosteroids. VanDyke et al. (1975) found reduced levels of muscle carnitine in both parents of an 8-year-old boy with this disorder, thus supporting autosomal recessive inheritance. See 255100. |
255125::this form of myopathy with lactic acidosis, also known as Swedish type myopathy with exercise intolerance, is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ISCU gene (611911), encoding the iron-sulfur cluster scaffold protein, on chromosome 12q24.|Hereditary myopathy with lactic acidosis is an autosomal recessive muscular disorder characterized by childhood onset of exercise intolerance with muscle tenderness, cramping, dyspnea, and palpitations. Biochemical features include lactic acidosis and, rarely, rhabdomyolysis. It is a chronic disorder with remission and exacerbation of the muscle phenotype (summary by Sanaker et al., 2010). |Reporting from Umea in northern Sweden, Larsson et al. (1964) described 14 patients in 5 families with an apparently distinct form of myopathy. The disease appeared in childhood and ran a chronic course with exacerbations and remissions. It was characterized by low physical performance. Physical exertion caused early exhaustion, dyspnea, and palpitations. In continued work the muscles became hard and tender with development of cramps and sometimes weakness. In its most severe form there was widespread weakness, severe acidosis, and sometimes myoglobinuria. Concentrations of lactate and pyruvate in the blood increased disproportionately for the workload. All the affected individuals were in single sibships and there was consanguinity in some of the families; recessive inheritance was thought likely. Linderholm et al. (1969) reported further findings in the same families. |Haller et al. (1991) evaluated a 22-year-old man from the same coastal area of northern Sweden as that identified by Larsson et al. (1964) and Linderholm et al. (1969) with an identical clinical history and similar exercise pathophysiology as that of previously described patients. He had had lifelong exercise intolerance marked by premature exertional muscle fatigue, dyspnea, and cardiac palpitations as well as episodes lasting days to weeks of increased muscle fatigability and weakness associated with painful muscle swelling and pigmenturia (myoglobinuria). Cycle exercise testing revealed low maximal oxygen uptake with exaggerated increases in venous lactate and pyruvate in relation to oxygen uptake but low lactate/pyruvate ratios in maximal exercise. |The patient studied by Schapira et al. (1990) showed some similarities; in that case (see 251945) it was speculated that iron-sulfur proteins of the mitochondrial respiratory chain may be encoded by nuclear genes and that a mutation in a single coding sequence might account for double deficiency. Haller et al. (1991) commented on the fact that myocardium and brain as well as vascular smooth muscle appeared to be spared in the deficiency of SDH/aconitase. |Reichmann and Angelini (1993) studied 2 brothers, aged 25 and 19 years, with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Both showed proximal muscle weakness and myopathic features by EMG. CPK was elevated. Muscle histochemistry showed subsarcolemmal mitochondria and lipid accumulation. SDH staining was negative in all muscle fibers, regardless of whether cross-sections or longitudinal sections were performed. Biochemical investigation showed a complex II defect in the respiratory chain.|Kollberg et al. (2009) reported 2 brothers with myopathy and lactic acidosis born of a Finnish mother. The boys had a more severe phenotype than other reported patients: both had progressive and severe muscle weakness and muscle wasting beginning at age 2 years. They also showed evidence of cardiac involvement, with EKG changes and mild cardiac hypertrophy without dilatation. Kollberg et al. (2009) noted that the boys did not complain of exercise intolerance, and suggested that they were too weak to even elicit symptoms such as tachycardia, palpitations, or shortness of breath. |
600462::myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic anemia-1 (MLASA1) is caused by homozygous mutation in the PUS1 gene (608109) on chromosome 12q24.|Myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic anemia (MLASA) is a rare autosomal recessive oxidative phosphorylation disorder specific to skeletal muscle and bone marrow (Bykhovskaya et al., 2004). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Myopathy, Lactic Acidosis, and Sideroblastic Anemia|MLASA2 (613561) is caused by mutation in the YARS2 gene (610957) on chromosome 12p11. MLASA3 (500011) is caused by heteroplasmic mutation in the mitochondrially-encoded MTATP6 gene (516060).|Rawles and Weller (1974) reported 2 brothers with myopathy, lactic acidosis, and sideroblastic anemia with ringed sideroblasts. Both brothers reported exercise intolerance beginning in childhood. The first was studied at age 19 because of breathlessness on exertion and ankle edema. A high cardiac output was the only finding; cardiac catheterization ruled out a cardiac disorder. Electron microscopy of muscle from one of the brothers showed paracrystalline inclusion bodies in mitochondria. The asymptomatic father of the boys had chronic lactic acidosis. |Among 6 offspring of first-cousin parents, Inbal et al. (1995) identified a brother and sister with a seemingly 'new' syndrome characterized by myopathy, sideroblastic anemia, lactic acidosis, mental retardation, microcephaly, high palate, high philtrum, distichiasis, and micrognathia. The patients' muscle mitochondria contained very low levels of cytochromes a, b, and c. Deposition of iron within the mitochondria of bone marrow erythroblasts was observed on electron microscopy. Irregular and enlarged mitochondria with paracrystalline inclusions were also seen on electron microscopy of muscle. However, examination of DNA from the affected sibs showed no deletions in the mitochondrial DNA and no mutations of the type identified in the syndrome of mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes (MELAS; 540000) or the syndrome of myoclonus and epilepsy associated with ragged-red fibers (MERRF; 545000). |Casas and Fischel-Ghodsian (2004) described this disorder in a Jewish Iranian family with 4 affected individuals living in the United States. Hallmark features included progressive exercise intolerance during childhood, onset of sideroblastic anemia around adolescence, basal lactic acidemia, and mitochondrial myopathy. The presence of 2 affected sib pairs, unaffected parents, an unaffected sib, and parental consanguinity suggested autosomal recessive inheritance. |Metodiev et al. (2015) reported a 26-year-old Turkish woman with a protracted form of MLASA1. She was diagnosed with transfusion-dependent congenital sideroblastic anemia at age 1 year, and bone marrow aspirate showed dyserythropoiesis. She had failure to thrive and reduced muscle bulk without major muscle weakness or ptosis. She needed special schooling, but was an otherwise friendly and outgoing adolescent and young adult. As a young adult, she had microcephaly (-3 SD), mild intellectual disability, and moderate muscle weakness with impaired long distance walking. Plasma lactate consistently remained normal, and she had no cardiac involvement. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed a few ragged-red fibers and a profound deficiency of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes I and IV. Studies of cultured skin fibroblasts showed qualitative anomalies in the assembly of mitochondrial complex I. Metodiev et al. (2015) emphasized the unusually long survival of this patient. |
608300::N-acetylglutamate synthase (EC 2.3.1.1) is a mitochondrial enzyme that catalyzes the formation of N-acetylglutamate (NAG), an essential allosteric activator of carbamoyl phosphate synthase I (CPS1; 608307), the first and rate-limiting enzyme in the urea cycle. Patients with NAGS deficiency (NAGSD; 237310) develop hyperammonemia because CPS1 is inactive without NAG (Caldovic et al., 2002).|
161400::narcolepsy-1 (NRCLP1) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the HCRT gene (602358) on chromosome 17q21. One such patient has been reported.|Adie (1926) first delineated narcolepsy as a separate and specific entity. It is a sleep disorder characterized by attacks of disabling daytime drowsiness and low alertness. The normal physiologic components of rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, dreaming and loss of muscle tone, are separated and also occur while the subject is awake, resulting in half-sleep dreams and episodes of skeletal muscle paralysis and atonia (cataplexy and sleep paralysis). Unlike normal sleep, that of narcolepsy often begins with REM activity and the time taken to fall asleep is shorter than normal.|In contrast to animal models, human narcolepsy is not a simple genetic disorder. Most human cases of narcolepsy are sporadic and carry a specific HLA haplotype (Peyron et al., 2000). Familial cases are the exception rather than the rule, and monozygotic twins show only partial concordance (25 to 31%) (Mignot, 1998). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Narcolepsy|Additional narcolepsy loci have been mapped to chromosomes 4 (NRCLP2; 605841), 21q (NRCLP3; 609039), 22q13 (NRCLP4; 612417), 14q11 (NRCLP5; 612851), and 19p13.2 (NRCLP6; 614223). NRCLP7 (614250) is caused by mutation in the MOG gene (159465) on chromosome 6p22. Resistance to narcolepsy is associated with minor alleles of a SNP and a marker in the NLC1A gene (610259) on chromosome 21q22.|In 3 generations of a family, Daly and Yoss (1959) found 12 definite and 3 possible cases. Whereas about two-thirds of all cases of narcolepsy (sleeping attacks) are associated with cataplexy (paroxysmal attacks of weakness or frank paralysis, associated especially with strong emotion), only 3 of the 12 affected persons in this family displayed cataplexy. Furthermore, in these cases the weakness was mild.|In a later publication, Yoss (1970) reported studies with infrared pupillography in narcolepsy families, leading to the conclusion that narcolepsy is polygenic, i.e., that the affected persons are at one end of a spectrum. When a person is awake and alert in total darkness, his pupils are large. During sleep the pupils are small. The pupils are intermediate in size when the subject is between these two extremes. This is the basis of infrared pupillography as a gauge of wakefulness. The author suggested that it would be very unusual for 2 persons with philagrypnia (ability to stay alert with little sleep) to have an offspring with narcolepsy. Based on the findings of abnormalities on pupillometry (Yoss et al., 1969), a disturbance of the central autonomic nervous system in narcolepsy had been suggested. Hublin et al. (1994) proved that this was not the case in their studies of 22 unmedicated narcoleptics with extensive tests of autonomic function, all of which proved to be normal. |Thannickal et al. (2000) studied the hypothalamus of 16 human brains, including those of 4 narcoleptics. The human narcoleptics had an 85 to 95% reduction in the number of HCRT neurons. Melanin-concentrating hormone (176795) neurons, which are intermixed with HCRT cells in the normal brain, were not reduced in number, indicating that cell loss was relatively specific for HCRT neurons. The presence of gliosis in the hypocretin cell region is consistent with a degenerative process being the cause of the HCRT loss in narcolepsy. |Nishino et al. (2000) measured immunoreactive HCRT in the cerebrospinal fluid of 9 patients with narcolepsy and 8 age-matched controls. HCRT1 was detectable in all controls; in 7 of 9 patients, HCRT concentrations were below the detection limit of the assay. The authors proposed that an HLA-associated autoimmune-mediated destruction of HCRT-containing neurons in the lateral hypothalamus might produce narcolepsy in these patients. |In 31 patients with narcolepsy, Dalal et al. (2001) found reduced or undetectable levels of CSF hypocretin compared to controls. Plasma levels of hypocretin, however, were at normal levels, similar to controls, suggesting that systemic hypocretin derived from CNS-independent sources is preserved in narcolepsy. The authors noted that a potential autoimmune mechanism for the disorder is unlikely to be directed against the hypocretin molecule. |Dauvilliers et al. (2001) collected data on age at onset and severity of narcolepsy in 317 patients with well-defined narcolepsy-cataplexy from Montpellier, France, and in 202 patients from Montreal, Canada. The mean age at onset was 23.4 years in Montpellier and 24.4 years in Montreal. However, the age at onset was bimodal in these 2 independent patient populations: a first peak occurred at 14.7 years, and a second peak at 35 years. Age at onset clearly differentiated patients with a positive family history of narcolepsy (early onset) from those without a family history. Other clinical and polygraphic findings suggested that young age at onset is associated with increased severity of the condition (higher frequency of cataplexy and decreased mean sleep latency on the Multiple Sleep Latency Test). Dauvilliers et al. (2001) suggested that age at onset is genetically determined. |Arii et al. (2004) found very low CSF hypocretin-1 levels in 6 of 6 children with narcolepsy ranging in age from 6 to 16 years. All were DR2-positive. Decreased levels of CSF hypocretin-1 were also found in children with Guillain-Barre syndrome (139393), head trauma, brain tumor, and CNS infection. The authors concluded that measurement of CSF hypocretin-1 is diagnostically useful in children. |
256520::Neu-Laxova syndrome-1 (NLS1) is caused by homozygous mutation in the PHGDH gene (606879) on chromosome 1p12.See also PHGDH deficiency (601815), an allelic disorder with a less severe phenotype.|Neu-Laxova syndrome is an autosomal recessive lethal multiple malformation syndrome characterized by ichthyosis, marked intrauterine growth restriction, microcephaly, short neck, central nervous system anomalies (lissencephaly, cerebellar hypoplasia and/or abnormal/agenesis of the corpus callosum), limb deformities, hypoplastic lungs, edema, and abnormal facial features including severe proptosis with ectropion, hypertelorism, micrognathia, flattened nose, and malformed ears (summary by Manning et al., 2004). |NLS2 (616038) is caused by mutation in the PSAT1 gene (610936) on chromosome 9q21.|Neu et al. (1971) described 3 sibs with intrauterine growth retardation and multiple congenital anomalies, including microcephaly and abnormal limbs, skin, external genitalia, and placenta. Two girls were stillborn and a boy died at 7 weeks. Laxova et al. (1972) likewise reported 3 sibs. The parents were first cousins. Povysilova et al. (1976) reported 3 affected sibs. Lazjuk et al. (1979) reported a sporadic case. Autopsy showed a brain that weighed only 19.8 gm, the smallest recorded weight for brain in a 39-week fetus. |Winter et al. (1981) described 2 patients with Neu-Laxova syndrome and 1 patient with cerebrooculofacioskeletal (COFS) syndrome (214150) and discussed possible genetic relationships of the 2 disorders. |Scott et al. (1981) reported additional cases of Neu-Laxova syndrome, bringing the total to 13. They summarized as follows: 'The Neu-Laxova syndrome is a lethal dysplasia-malformation syndrome with abnormalities of placentation, severe intrauterine growth retardation, edema, ectodermal dysplasia, and the CAD complex with severe CNS developmental defect.' CAD is the acronym for cerebroarthrodigital syndrome (Spranger et al., 1980). Scott et al. (1981) concluded that the patients of Spranger et al. (1980) did not have the Neu-Laxova syndrome, but a possibly teratogenic malformation syndrome with better prognosis than in the Neu-Laxova syndrome. |Fitch et al. (1982) reported parental consanguinity and discussed further the differentiation from the COFS syndrome. The classic COFS syndrome does not include short neck, ichthyosis, subcutaneous swelling or syndactyly; retardation of development of the brain is much less severe than in the Neu-Laxova syndrome and neonatal lethality is not a feature. See also review by Curry (1982). Prominence of the eyes (exophthalmos) is a conspicuous feature of the Neu-Laxova syndrome; absence of the eyelids exaggerates the exophthalmos. Curry (1982) suggested that there may be two types of this syndrome, each caused by mutation in a separate gene. Group 1 cases, represented by patients such as that of Fitch et al. (1982), have no edema and no increased fat layer, whereas those of group 2, represented by the patient reported by Muller et al. (1987), among others, show an increased layer of subcutaneous adipose tissues with hypertrophy of fat cells. |Karimi-Nejad et al. (1987) emphasized ichthyotic skin lesions as a prominent characteristic change and called attention to the increased fatty tissue beneath the epidermis and the atrophic muscles embedded therein. Naveed et al. (1990) described the ichthyotic skin lesions in an affected infant born of consanguineous South Indian parents. |Ostrovskaya and Lazjuk (1988) reviewed cerebral abnormalities on the basis of 3 cases. |Meguid and Temtamy (1991) reported an affected female from 2 different families in each of which 4 other members were affected. Severe microcephaly with slanting forehead and protuberant eyes, generalized edema, contractures of the limbs, and generalized ichthyotic skin lesions were features.|Kuseyri et al. (1993) described an affected newborn female, the offspring of consanguineous Turkish parents. |Rouzbahani (1995) described an affected male infant of a nonconsanguineous Iranian couple; in addition to typical manifestations, the infant had cleft lip and palate, short limbs with hypoplastic forearms, recognizable thumbs and 3 fingers, 3 recognizable toes, and atrial and ventricular septal defects. |In a review of the literature, Manning et al. (2004) found reports of 61 purported cases of NLS. Although most were sporadic, a number of cases had been reported in consanguineous families. At least 10 families with multiple affected children had been described. The families were from diverse ethnic backgrounds. Manning et al. (2004) concluded that the data from these patients suggested that NLS represents a heterogeneous phenotype. |Manar and Asma (2010) reported a Jordanian girl, born of consanguineous parents, with Neu-Laxova syndrome. The patient presented at 31 weeks' gestation with severe intrauterine growth retardation. Ultrasound showed severe microcephaly, large mouth, decreased fetal movement, fixed flexion of upper and lower limbs with clubfeet, and kyphosis. At birth, the infant had poor respiration requiring mechanical ventilation. There were significant dysmorphic features, including proptotic eyes with extremely hyperemic conjunctivae and hazy cornea, closed fontanels, hypertelorism, depressed nose, and high-arched palate. The skin was thick, shiny, and very tight with fissuring at the flexion areas, abdomen, and chest, consistent with ichthyosis. The hips were in fixed flexion, the digits were short, and the hands and feet were edematous. She had no spontaneous movement, no spontaneous eye movement, and the pupils were small and nonreactive. Brain CT revealed a very small brain with lissencephaly and intraventricular and intracerebral hemorrhages. She died on day 4 of life. |Acuna-Hidalgo et al. (2014) reported 4 fetuses from 3 unrelated families with NLS1. Clinical features included intrauterine growth retardation, decreased fetal movements, microcephaly, facial dysmorphism, limb and digital deformities, rocker-bottom feet, swollen hands or feet, and ichthyosis. |
256700::susceptibility to neuroblastoma-1 (NBLST1) is conferred by germline and somatic mutations in the KIF1B gene (605995) on chromosome 1p36.|Neuroblastoma is the most common childhood cancer diagnosed before the age of 1 year, and accounts for 10 to 15% of all cancer deaths in children. Some patients inherit a genetic predisposition to neuroblastoma due to germline mutations, whereas others develop sporadic disease that may result from either germline or somatic mutations. Neuroblastoma tumors are derived from embryonic cells that form the primitive neural crest and give rise to the adrenal medulla and the sympathetic nervous system (Roberts et al., 1998; Eng, 2008). Histopathologically, neuroblastoma can range in type from the most aggressive form, neuroblastoma, composed entirely of immature neural precursor cells, to ganglioneuroma, composed entirely of mature neural tissue. The most important prognostic factor for patients with neuroblastoma is the extent of the tumor at the time of diagnosis (Roberts et al., 1998). |Neuroblastoma can also be part of cancer-prone syndromes, such as paragangliomas (see, e.g., PGL4; 115310).|Genetic Heterogeneity of Susceptibility to Neuroblastoma|Susceptibility to neuroblastoma is genetically heterogeneous and is conferred by mutation in the PHOX2B gene (603851) on chromosome 4p12 (NBLST2; 613013) and by mutation in the ALK gene (105590) on chromosome 2p23 (NBLST3; 613014).|Loci implicated in the development of neuroblastoma include 6p (NBLST4; 613015), 2q35 (NBLST5; 613016), and 1q21 (NBLST6; 613017).|Dodge and Benner (1945) reported a brother and sister with neuroblastoma of the adrenal medulla. In the family of Zimmerman (1951), the father had had a mediastinal ganglioneuroma removed at age 10 years. Helson et al. (1969) found elevated catecholamines in sibs of children with overt neuroblastomas. Chatten and Voorhees (1967) reported a kindred with multiple disorders, including neuroblastomas in 4 sibs. All also had cafe-au-lait spots. Gerson et al. (1974) gave a follow-up on the family reported by Chatten and Voorhees (1967). The mother of 4 sibs with neuroblastoma had persistently elevated urinary catecholamines, but was asymptomatic. She was subsequently found to have a posterior mediastinal mass which in retrospective review of radiographs was found to have been present and of constant size for at least 16 years. Griffin and Bolande (1969) described 2 sisters with congenital disseminated neuroblastoma. Both had regression of the retroperitoneal tumors to fibrocalcific residues and maturation to ganglioneuroma. In 1, metastatic nodules in the skin matured to ganglioneuromas and came to resemble neurofibromas by progressive loss of ganglion cells. A 15-year-old sister had a small focus of adrenal calcification on x-ray. |Wong et al. (1971) described an affected brother and sister, each of whom was diagnosed at the age of 5.5 months. The father showed increased amounts of vanillylmandelic acid in the urine. Hardy and Nesbit (1972) reported neuroblastoma in a brother and sister and a male first cousin. Wagget et al. (1973) described 2 sib pairs of which all 4 died with metastatic neuroblastoma. There was no evidence of tumor or neurofibromatosis in sibs or parents. |Pegelow et al. (1975) reported a family with 3 instances of neuroblastoma. The proposita had neuroblastoma at birth and both parents had had children, by previous matings, who had died of neuroblastoma. Hecht et al. (1982) reported further information on the family reported by Pegelow et al. (1975). The proposita was well at age 8.5 years, after receiving chemotherapy early in life. By the previous marriage, the father of the proposita had a healthy son who fathered a child with congenital metastatic neuroblastoma. Two chromosomal variants were segregating in the family, but neither correlated with neuroblastoma or the presumed carrier status. |
605027::non-Hodgkin lymphoma is associated with somatic mutations in a number of genes, including CASP10 (601762), ATM (607585), RAD54L (603615), BRAF (164757), perforin-1 (PRF1; 170280), and CARD11 (607210).|
613282::The accumulation of excess triglyceride in the liver, a condition known as hepatic steatosis (or fatty liver), is associated with adverse metabolic consequences including insulin resistance and dyslipidemia. Factors promoting deposition of fat in the liver include obesity, diabetes, insulin resistance, and alcohol ingestion. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common form of liver disease in Western countries. In a subset of individuals hepatic steatosis promotes an inflammatory response in the liver, referred to as steatohepatitis, which can progress to cirrhosis and liver cancer (summary by Romeo et al., 2008). |Cohen et al. (2011) reviewed nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. |Another form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD2; 613387) has been associated with variation in the APOC3 gene (107720).|
601665::there are single gene disorders with obesity as an isolated or predominant feature. Heterozygous mutations in the melanocortin-4 receptor gene (MC4R; 155541) cause obesity as an isolated trait. Autosomal recessive disorders with obesity as a predominant feature include leptin deficiency (614962), leptin receptor deficiency (614963), prohormone convertase-1 deficiency (600955), and proopiomelanocortin deficiency (609734); associated features in these disorders include hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, hypoadrenalism, and short stature.|Many major obesity susceptibility loci, as well as some leanness susceptibility loci, have been identified (see body mass index (BMI), 606641).|There are also syndromes associated with obesity such as Prader-Willi syndrome (176270), Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS; see 209900), and Cohen syndrome (216550), among others.|For a review of the molecular basis of obesity, see Barsh et al. (2000). Bell et al. (2005) provided a comprehensive review of the genetics of human obesity. |For a review of the molecular understanding of adaptive thermogenesis, see Lowell and Spiegelman (2000). |Barness et al. (2007) reviewed the genetic, molecular, and environmental aspects of obesity and discussed the myriad associated complications, including hypertension (145500), dyslipidemia, endothelial dysfunction, type 2 diabetes mellitus (125853) and impaired glucose tolerance, acanthosis nigricans (100600), hepatic steatosis, premature puberty (see 176400), hypogonadism and polycystic ovary syndrome, obstructive sleep disorder, orthopedic complications, cholelithiasis, and pseudotumor cerebri (243200). |
304150::occipital horn syndrome (OHS) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding Cu(2+)-transporting ATPase, alpha polypeptide (ATP7A; 300011). Menkes syndrome (309400) is caused by mutation in the same gene.|Occipital horn syndrome is a rare connective tissue disorder characterized by hyperelastic and bruisable skin, hernias, bladder diverticula, hyperextensible joints, varicosities, and multiple skeletal abnormalities. The disorder is sometimes accompanied by mild neurologic impairment, and bony abnormalities of the occiput are a common feature, giving rise to the name (summary by Das et al., 1995). |Lazoff et al. (1975) described an unusual syndrome in an 11-year-old male and 2 maternal uncles. Bony 'horns,' symmetrically situated on each side of the foramen magnum and pointing caudad, were demonstrable radiographically. A lifelong history of frequent loose stools, obstructive uropathy requiring in 1 uncle ileal loop diversion, and mild mental retardation were other features. Some suspicion that a relative through the maternal grandfather had the same condition (which could not be confirmed because of lack of cooperation) meant that autosomal dominant inheritance with reduced penetrance could not be excluded.|Byers et al. (1976) found deficiency of lysyl oxidase in affected males in a family with apparent X-linked cutis laxa. Three affected males were observed, each in a different sibship connected through females who as children showed joint laxity but outgrew it. Hooked nose and long philtrum typical of cutis laxa were described. In 1 case, pectus excavatum and carinatum were sufficiently severe to require surgical repair shortly after birth. Two cousins were brought to medical attention because of recurrent urinary tract infection due to multiple large diverticula of the bladder. |MacFarlane et al. (1980) described 2 kindreds with an X-linked disorder that in general appeared to fall into the Ehlers-Danlos category but had some unusual features such as bladder diverticula, bladder neck obstruction, marked varicosities, and, by x-ray, occipital horns, short broad clavicles, and fused carpal bones. Hall (1980) found that the children studied with Byers et al. (1976) also had occipital horns, and diarrhea, a feature found in MacFarlane's families, was also present. Thus, these are probably the same disorder. The age at which the affected persons were studied may have been a factor in determining whether the disorder was labeled cutis laxa or EDS. Low levels of ceruloplasmin (117700) and serum copper were found in these cases, suggesting that, like Menkes syndrome, it may be a disorder of copper metabolism rather than a primary defect of lysyl oxidase.|Hollister (1981) pointed out that the patients show hypermobility of the finger joints but limitation of extension of the elbows.|Kuivaniemi et al. (1982) studied 2 brothers with bladder diverticula, inguinal hernias, slight skin laxity and hyperextensibility, and skeletal abnormalities, including occipital exostoses. Lysyl oxidase activity was low in the medium of cultured skin fibroblasts, and conversion of newly synthesized collagen into the insoluble form was reduced. Copper concentrations were markedly elevated in cultured skin fibroblasts but decreased in serum and hair. Serum ceruloplasmin levels were low. |Kaitila et al. (1982) suggested that this disorder may be allelic to Menkes disease.|Peltonen et al. (1983) found many similar abnormalities of copper and collagen metabolism in the cultured fibroblasts of 13 patients with Menkes syndrome and 2 patients with OHS (then called EDS IX). In both disorders, fibroblasts had markedly increased copper content and rate of incorporation of (64)Cu, and accumulation was in metallothionein or a metallothionein-like protein as previously established for Menkes cells. Histochemical staining showed that copper was distributed uniformly throughout the cytoplasm in both cell types, this location being consistent with accumulation in metallothionein. Both fibroblast types showed very low lysyl oxidase activity and increased extractability of newly synthesized collagen, but no abnormality in cell viability, duplication rate, prolyl 4-hydroxylase activity, or collagen synthesis rate. Skin biopsy specimens from one EDS IX patient showed the same abnormalities in lysyl oxidase activity and collagen extractability. Fibroblasts of the mother of EDS IX patients showed increased (64)Cu incorporation. |Allelism of occipital horn syndrome and Menkes syndrome was demonstrated in a definitive way by Das et al. (1995) who identified hemizygosity for a mutation in the copper-transporting ATPase that is mutant in Menkes syndrome. One of the mild mottled mutants in the mouse, 'blotchy,' symbolized Mo-blo, exhibits connective tissue abnormalities reminiscent of those seen in OHS patients, including weak skin and bone abnormalities. In blotchy males, hindlegs are occasionally deformed, vibrissae are kinked at birth, crosslinking of skin collagen and aortic elastin is defective, and death frequently results from aortic rupture. Das et al. (1995) identified similar splicing mutations in both the blotchy mouse and cases of the occipital horn syndrome. Das et al. (1995) reported 2 OHS patients in each of whom there was a deletion of 1 exon in the ATP7A gene; one deletion was caused by an A-to-G transition at the -4 position of the splice acceptor site 5-prime of the skipped exon, and the other deletion was caused by a G-to-A transition at the +5 splice donor site following the skipped exon. The first patient had presented to a genetics clinic at the age of 14 years for evaluation of musculoskeletal abnormalities and recurrent bladder rupture. In the neonatal period, mild hypotonia and, on radiographs, cranial contour abnormalities and wormian bones had been observed. There had been numerous orthopedic interventions, including osteotomies for leg straightening and treatment for multiple compression fractures of the vertebrae. Recurrent bladder rupture, bladder diverticula, vesicular calcium stones, and atonic bladder required intermittent catheterization. Examination showed dolichocephaly, prominent and simple ears, downslanting palpebral fissures with bilateral ptosis, dental crowding, pectus carinatum, cutis laxa, and muscle wasting. Neurologic status, including cognition, was normal. Serum ceruloplasmin was slightly low. Radiographs demonstrated osteopenia, dislocated radial heads, and characteristic occipital horns. Radiocopper accumulation in fibroblasts was elevated. The second patient presented to a medical genetics clinic at the age of 15 years, at which time he was wheelchair-bound because of genu valgum and coxa vara deformities. He was mentally retarded. The skin had a cobblestone appearance with hyperelasticity at the elbows and without skin friability. There was laxity of the interphalangeal joints with contractures at the elbows and knees. Serum ceruloplasmin and copper determinations were normal. Radiographs showed bilateral occipital horns. The large diverticula of the bladder were demonstrated. X-rays of the skeleton showed osteoporosis, fusion anomalies in the wrist, and dysplasia of the radius and ulna, with dislocation of the radius at the elbow. |That the occipital horn syndrome has ramifications beyond connective tissue is suggested by peculiarities of personality. Unlike patients with Menkes disease, most patients with OHS have mild mental retardation. Wakai et al. (1993) described the first Japanese case in a 34-year-old man who had psychomotor retardation and seizures since early childhood. At the time of study, he had severe mental retardation and generalized muscular atrophy, in addition to characteristic facial features, hyperelasticity of the skin, and joint subluxation. Laboratory studies demonstrated low serum copper and ceruloplasmin levels as well as intestinal nonabsorption of copper. Radiographic studies showed occipital exostoses, bladder diverticula, tortuosity of peripheral veins, and osteoporosis. Lysyl oxidase activity was decreased in skin. |Tsukahara et al. (1994) described OHS in an 18-year-old Japanese boy. In addition to bilateral occipital exostosis, radiologic features were prominent mandibular angles, short and broad clavicles with 'hammer-shaped' distal ends, long bones with thin and undercalcified cortices, coalescence between the hamate and capitate bones and between the greater and lesser multiangular bones, and coxa valga. Since birth the patient had had chronic diarrhea (5-10 times/day) that did not respond to antidiarrheal drugs. Tsukahara et al. (1994) found reports of a total of 21 patients, all male. Mild manifestations were described in some of the mothers or aunts of patients (Herman et al., 1992). |In a study of cultured cells from patients with EDS IX, Kuivaniemi et al. (1985) could not demonstrate that there was secreted into the medium or contained in the cell any significant amounts of copper-deficient, catalytically inactive lysyl oxidase protein. Although the rapid degradation of a mutant protein could not be excluded, the authors favored the idea that synthesis of the lysyl oxidase protein is impaired. Levinson et al. (1993) found a marked reduction in expression of a copper-transporting ATPase gene, which Vulpe et al. (1993) had designated Mc1 and proposed as a candidate gene for Menkes disease, in Northern blots of RNA extracted from fibroblasts of 2 unrelated males with X-linked cutis laxa. |Blackston et al. (1987) studied copper storage and copper retention in females at risk of being heterozygous. In the mother of an affected male, they found in skin fibroblasts a level of total copper and a value for retention of copper that were outside the normal. The findings in a sister of the proband indicated that she was homozygous normal.|Khakoo et al. (1997) reported 2 phenotypically similar patients with primary cutis laxa associated with deficiency of lysyl oxidase. Previous reports of congenital cutis laxa had concerned mainly the X-linked form of the disorder, which is characterized by typical occipital osseous projections and an abnormality of copper metabolism. The 2 patients reported by Khakoo et al. (1997) showed no occipital projections and had normal copper metabolism. Furthermore, they showed wormian bones, and the family pattern of inheritance was thought to be consistent with an autosomal recessive disorder. The first boy, 15 years old at the time of report, was born with unusually translucent wrinkled skin with prominent veins, generalized joint laxity, and a hooked nose. A large umbilical hernia was repaired at 3 months of age. Lysyl oxidase deficiency was demonstrated by study of cultured fibroblasts. Lax skin, generalized joint laxity, and blue sclerae were consistently noted. The ears were large with prominent lobes. At the age of 10, the skin had become thicker without residual translucency. Wormian bones were demonstrated in the lambdoid sutures and osteoporosis of the lumbar spine was found. The mother's lysyl oxidase levels were approximately half normal. The second boy was born to first-cousin parents of Pakistani origin. Again the skin was lax at birth and the nose hooked, the joints of the hands and feet were hypermobile, and wormian bones were demonstrated in the lambdoid sutures. There was an irreducible, translocated left hip. Lysyl oxidase activity was measured at 20% of normal. At 2 years of age, the patient developed acute renal failure, owing to a vesicoureteric obstruction causing gross bilateral hydroureters and hydronephrosis. Bladder atonicity was also present. The ears were large, and radiographs of the lumbar spine showed osteoporosis. Bilateral dislocatable shoulders were also present in this boy, who was 5 years old at the time of the report. |Tang et al. (2006) described 2 brothers with occipital horn syndrome. The proband had occipital horns bilaterally at age 4 years, short broad clavicles, broad and flat ilia, and dislocated radial heads. Both brothers had genu valgum; the proband required bilateral tibial osteotomies. Both brothers had coarse hair and hyperelastic skin but no dysmorphic facial features. The mother, who carried the mutation present in her sons, had had clubfoot requiring multiple surgeries as a young child. She had coarse hair and mild hyperextensibility of the metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints, which was marked in her sons. |
309000::Lowe oculocerebrorenal syndrome (OCRL) is caused by mutation in the OCRL gene (300535) on chromosome Xq26.Mutations in the OCRL gene also cause Dent disease-2 (300355).|The features of Lowe syndrome are hydrophthalmia, cataract, mental retardation, vitamin D-resistant rickets, amino aciduria, and reduced ammonia production by the kidney. Streiff et al. (1958) suggested X linkage because all cases were male and affected brothers had been described. In 1 case, 2 brothers and a cousin (the mothers were sisters) were affected. Hyporeflexia and hypotonia are usual features, and 'ragged red fiber' muscle pathology has been described (Bailey et al., 1992). |Charnas et al. (1991) investigated 23 patients with Lowe syndrome ranging in age from 4 months to 31 years. Linear growth decreased after 1 year of age; bone age was found to lie between chronologic age and height age. Renal dysfunction, characterized by proteinuria, generalized amino aciduria, carnitine wasting, and phosphaturia, occurred in the first year of life. Urinary wasting of individual amino acids was milder than in cystinosis (see 219800), and branched-chain amino acids were relatively spared. Reciprocal serum creatinine levels fell linearly with age, predicting renal failure in the fourth decade. In the blood, concentrations of the muscle enzymes creatine kinase, aspartate aminotransferase, and lactate dehydrogenase, as well as those of total serum protein, serum alpha-2-globulin, and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, were elevated. Most patients required alkalinization therapy and many benefited from supplemental potassium, phosphate, calcium, and carnitine. The serum enzyme elevations suggested muscle involvement. |Kenworthy et al. (1993) reviewed IQ and behavior in 47 affected males. Mean IQ was in the moderate to mental retardation range (40-54), with 25% of tested individuals in the normal range (IQ = 70 or more). More than 80% had maladaptive behaviors, particularly stubbornness, temper tantrums, and stereotypic behaviors. |Matsuda et al. (1969) described a Japanese boy with typical clinical features of Lowe syndrome, but the metabolic acidosis was shown to be due to failure of bicarbonate reabsorption rather than of urinary acidification. The proband's father showed amino aciduria after ornithine loading. Matsuda et al. (1970) proposed that this is a special type of Lowe syndrome that may have autosomal recessive inheritance. They suggested that the cases described by Oetliker and Rossi (1969) were of this type. |Although there is a wide range of intellectual function in affected individuals, it is often compromised by a high prevalence of maladaptive behaviors, including tantrums, stubbornness, and stereotypy (complex repetitive behaviors). Kenworthy and Charnas (1995) conducted a study to determine whether these behaviors simply reflect the multiple disabilities found in developmentally impaired individuals with or without OCRL or represent a specific genetically determined behavioral phenotype of OCRL. Forty-three cases of OCRL were paired with 43 controls matched for age, sex, visual impairment, and adaptive functioning. Individuals with OCRL displayed significantly more severe maladaptive behaviors than controls. Discriminate function analysis identified 5 behaviors as significantly distinguishing between controls and OCRL individuals: temper tantrums, irritability, stereotypy/mannerisms, obsessions/unusual preoccupations, and negativism. These behavioral features may be a specific effect of the OCRL gene on the central nervous system. |Gropman et al. (2000) described a mildly affected boy with a diagnosis of Lowe syndrome, confirmed by enzymatic activity of skin fibroblasts, in whom there was a history of congenital cataracts and mild developmental delay and who had hematuria with proteinuria but minimal signs of renal tubular dysfunction. Renal biopsy was compatible with the diagnosis of noncomplement fixating chronic glomerulonephritis. Thus, OCRL should be considered in boys with cataracts and glomerular disease, even in the absence of renal tubular defects and frank mental retardation. |By slit-lamp examination, Richards et al. (1965) found lens opacities in heterozygotes. Mild 'snowflake' lenticular opacities in carrier females were described by Martin and Carson (1967) and by Gardner and Brown (1976). |Amino aciduria in the mother of a patient, after loading with ornithine, was reported as a heterozygote manifestation by Chutorian and Rowland (1966); a high incidence of maternal cataract had been noted. |Svorc et al. (1967) described an affected female child and referred to 2 others in the literature. Such cases may have a different genetic mechanism than X-linkage or may represent infelicitous lyonization in heterozygous females. |Harris et al. (1970), Hodgson et al. (1986), and Mueller et al. (1991) each reported female patients with Lowe syndrome. |Cau et al. (2006) reported a young woman with classic Lowe syndrome caused by a de novo OCRL mutation in the active paternal X chromosome. Studies showed extremely skewed X inactivation (100:0) of the maternal chromosome. Family studies found 5 of 7 unaffected females with extremely skewed X-inactivation of the maternal chromosome transmitted as an X-linked dominant trait (300179). |
146300::the disorder is caused by heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (ALPL; 171760) on chromosome 1p36.|Fraser (1957) classified forms of hypophosphatasia according to age of onset: perinatal (see 241500), infantile (241500), childhood (241510), and adult. Whyte (1988) indicated a fifth form of hypophosphatasia with primarily only dental manifestations, referred to as odontohypophosphatasia. All of these forms are allelic. |In the family reported by Silverman (1962), a father and 2 sons had hypophosphatasia. The paternal grandmother may have been affected. No evidence of heterozygosity was obtained in the propositus' wife or 2 unaffected children. Clinical features were early loss of teeth, bowed legs diagnosed as rickets and requiring osteotomy, and beaten-copper appearance of skull x-ray. The propositus had served in the U.S. Air Force. Danovitch et al. (1968) also suggested dominant inheritance as the mechanism in the family they studied. Three female cousins, the daughters of 3 sisters, and their mothers had low serum alkaline phosphatase and elevated urinary phosphoethanolamine. Two of the cousins had premature loss of primary teeth. Intestinal alkaline phosphatase was normal. Jardon et al. (1970) described a woman who was asymptomatic until age 50 years. She showed pseudofracture of the proximal femur and calcification of paraspinous ligaments like those in adults with hypophosphatemic rickets (see 307800). Bixler et al. (1974) observed affected persons in 3 generations. Bixler (1976) referred to 4 kindreds showing autosomal dominant inheritance, and a fifth described to him by another worker. Electrophoretic abnormality of isozymes were described by Hosenfeld and Hosenfeld (1973). The diagnosis often can be made first by the dentist who is asked to explain a child's early loss of deciduous incisors, usually before 3 years of age. Males were less severely affected in the kindred reported by Whyte et al. (1979). Expression is so mild in many of the persons presumed to have the dominant disorder that the mating of 2 such individuals might present as the phenotype of infantile hypophosphatasia (241500) in an offspring. 'A correct diagnosis is important, since vitamin D therapy, appropriate for most forms of osteomalacia, is of no benefit in hypophosphatasia and has led to inordinate hypercalcemia with resultant kidney damage' (Weinstein and Whyte, 1981). |Whyte et al. (1982) described a family in which 3 sisters had chondrocalcinosis and arthropathy as a complication. Whyte et al. (1982) showed that cultured skin fibroblasts are low in alkaline phosphatase; thus, since the enzyme deficiency is not limited to bone, the disorder is not a selective abiotrophy of osteoblasts. Whyte et al. (1985) found markedly increased circulating concentrations of pyridoxal-5-prime-phosphate (PLP) in all clinical forms of hypophosphatasia. The findings indicated that tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase acts in vitamin B6 metabolism. The enzyme appears to function as an ectoenzyme to regulate extracellular but not intracellular levels of PLP substrate. Assays of circulating PLP concentration may be misleading in assessing vitamin B6 nutrition in disorders associated with altered alkaline phosphatase activity. The degree of plasma PLP elevation generally reflected the clinical severity of the disorder (Whyte, 1988). A small oral dose of pyridoxine (which is converted to PLP) has been shown to discriminate patients from normals and may be useful for heterozygote detection (Whyte, 1988). The elevation of PLP was observed in all forms of hypophosphatasia, which Whyte (1988) indicated as 5 in number: perinatal, infantile (241500), childhood (241510), adult, and a form with primarily only dental manifestations which is referred to as odontohypophosphatasia. |Macfarlane et al. (1992) were impressed with the difference in severity in 2 sisters with hypophosphatasia. Both had early loss of primary teeth, but only 1 of them had clinical or radiologic manifestations: joint pains and peri- and intraarticular calcifications of joints of the hands, feet, and knees and calcification of the anterior spinous ligament in the lumbar area. The parents shared a common ancestor '6 generations back.' Chapple et al. (1992) described a family with affected members in 3 generations. |Hu et al. (2000) described a 4-generation Texas family segregating autosomal dominant hypophosphatasia in both children and adults. The probands were a 6-year-old girl and her twin brother, who exhibited enamel hypoplasia and the premature loss of fully rooted anterior teeth at age 3.5 years; histologic examination of a tooth demonstrated a complete absence of cementum on the root surface. Lateral cephalometric radiograph showed multiple radiolucent spots with wormian bone in the occipital region, and enlarged pulp chambers in the mandibular canines and first primary molars were evident in the panorex. Radiographs of the long bones and chest revealed no additional skeletal abnormalities. Serum PLP and urine phosphoethanolamine (PEA) were abnormally high in both of the twins and a definitive diagnosis of hypophosphatasia was made, which was supported by findings in other members of the kindred. |Lia-Baldini et al. (2001) reported a 15-month-old girl with a phenotype suggestive of childhood hypophosphatasia, whose father had recurrent dental caries in his third decade despite being raised with fluoridated water, which the authors suggested represented odontohypophosphatasia. A paternal aunt had died at 7 days of apparent neonatal hypophosphatasia, with X-rays showing poorly mineralized ribs and skull, and the paternal grandmother lost all her permanent teeth in her third decade and subsequently developed osteoporosis. |Unger et al. (2002) and Morava et al. (2002) reported 3 patients with cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD; 119600) and secondary hypophosphatasia. |Moore et al. (1999) described 2 families with mild hypophosphatasia, apparently transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait, in which ultrasonography detected 4 affected fetuses with severe long bone bowing. In contrast to the progressive deterioration typical of both the perinatal and infantile forms of hypophosphatasia, these skeletal defects improved spontaneously during infancy and early childhood. Biochemical evidence of hypophosphatasia was present in both families, and in 1 family, a mutation in the ALPL gene was identified (171760.0009). The authors noted that the prognosis for this condition was considerably better than for more severe forms of hypophosphatasia and for many other disorders that cause long bone bowing in utero. |Pauli et al. (1999) described an additional case with hypophosphatasia presenting with prenatal findings suggestive of a very severe bone dysplasia but with a subsequently benign course. Repeat late-gestation ultrasonography documented that improvement was already occurring prior to delivery. The authors emphasized the need to add spontaneously improving hypophosphatasia to the list of disorders presenting with in utero bony angulation or bowing. |
311250::ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency is caused by mutation in the gene encoding ornithine carbamoyltransferase (OTC; 300461) on chromosome Xp11.|Ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency is an X-linked inborn error of metabolism of the urea cycle which causes hyperammonemia. The disorder is treatable with supplemental dietary arginine and low protein diet.|Urea cycle disorders are characterized by the triad of hyperammonemia, encephalopathy, and respiratory alkalosis. Five disorders involving different defects in the biosynthesis of the enzymes of the urea cycle have been described: OTC deficiency, carbamyl phosphate synthetase deficiency (237300), argininosuccinate synthetase deficiency, or citrullinemia (215700), argininosuccinate lyase deficiency (207900), and arginase deficiency (207800).|Russell et al. (1962) described 2 cousins with chronic ammonia intoxication and mental deterioration. By liver biopsy, the activity of hepatic OTC was shown to be very low. A defect was presumed to be present in urea synthesis at the level of conversion of ornithine to citrulline. |Levin et al. (1969) reported an affected female infant whose mother had an aversion to protein and raised plasma ammonia levels, whereas the father was normal. In another infant, a male, Levin et al. (1969) found what they considered a variant of the usual hyperammonemia caused by OTC deficiency, presumably due to a different enzymatic change. Enzyme activity was 25% of normal, rather than 5 to 7% of normal as in other cases, and other properties of the enzyme showed differences from the normal. The clinical picture was milder than in the usual cases. Holmes et al. (1987) also described a mild variant of OTC deficiency. |Campbell et al. (1971, 1973) reported lethal neonatal hyperammonemia due to complete ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency. They suggested that mutation in the gene encoding the enzyme may lead to partial deficiency in heterozygous females and to complete deficiency in hemizygous males.|Thaler et al. (1974) described a 'novel protein tolerant variant' of OTC deficiency in a child with encephalopathy with fatty visceral degeneration suggestive of Reye syndrome. Krieger et al. (1979) reported a male infant with OTC deficiency who was relatively symptom free for 4 months, but gradually developed severe spasticity due to cerebral atrophy, and died at 13 months of age. Liver OTC activity was 1.5% of normal. The authors noted that the clinical picture of OTC deficiency during acute exacerbations with microvesicular fat accumulation in the liver may suggest Reye syndrome. |Bruton et al. (1970) described astrocyte transformation to Alzheimer type II glia, a feature of any form of hyperammonemia. Kornfeld et al. (1985) reported neuropathologic findings in 2 cases of OTC deficiency. A 3-day-old boy showed gliosis mainly in the brainstem, and a 2-year-old girl showed widespread gliosis and ulegyria of the cerebral cortex, as well as atrophy in the internal granular layer of the cerebellum. |Drogari and Leonard (1988) described 6 affected boys with relatively late onset of clinical symptoms. One of them was a boy who during childhood was considered a 'very difficult child, introverted with volcanic tempers.' At the age of 12 years, he had an episode of confusion for which he was admitted to hospital, but no cause was found. At the age of 14 years, he was admitted to hospital deeply unconscious after a high protein meal the night before admission. Urine orotic acid excretion was raised, and his mother was found to be a carrier. Thereafter, he was treated with a low protein diet, arginine supplements, and sodium benzoate. He had further episodes of hyperammonemia, however, particularly precipitated by energy restriction. At the age of 18 years he performed commendably in examinations and was accepted for medical school. Finkelstein et al. (1989, 1990) described 21 male patients who presented after age 28 days with what the authors defined as late-onset OTC deficiency. The patients appeared normal at birth, but irritability, vomiting and lethargy, which were often episodic, developed later. The age of presentation ranged from 2 months to 44 years. |Partial deficiency in the male, a presumably allelic form, was reported by Matsuda et al. (1971) and by Oizumi et al. (1984). Oizumi et al. (1984) reported the case of a 6-year-old boy who had intermittent coma with hyperammonemia precipitated by infections. Liver biopsy showed OTC activity 16% of normal. The mother showed elevated orotic acid excretion in the urine following protein load. Supplementation of dietary arginine abolished the episodes of hyperammonemia in the boy. Matsuda et al. (1991) described the clinical and laboratory features of 32 Japanese patients with OTC deficiency. They divided their patients into 3 groups, based on clinical manifestations and age of onset: group 1 (0 to 28 days), group 2 (29 days to 5 years), and group 3 (greater than 5 years). The lowest mortality and incidence of mental retardation was among the group 2 patients. Patients in groups 1 and 3 had similar mortality rates and enzyme activities. These patients had the highest citrulline levels and were asymptomatic prior to their first episode of hyperammonemia. The authors emphasized that the incidence of late-onset OTC deficiency is higher than previously recognized. |Anadiotis et al. (2001) reported a 15-year-old male patient with OTC deficiency who developed pancreatitis while taking a low protein diet, citrulline, and sodium phenylbutyrate. |Lee et al. (2002) noted that there have been several reports of acrodermatitis enteropathica-like dermatosis in association with inborn errors of the urea cycle, in citrullinemia associated with argininosuccinate synthase deficiency (Goldblum et al., 1986), and in carbamoyl phosphate synthetase deficiency (Kline et al., 1981). Lee et al. (2002) speculated that since arginine represents such a large proportion of the amino acid composition of epidermal keratins, arginine deficiency associated with urea cycle defects may contribute to compromised epidermal barrier function and skin lesions in affected infants. |Lien et al. (2007) reported a 52-year-old man who died suddenly of hyperammonemia after routine surgery for removal of a throat polyp. Eight days after surgery, he developed confusion, ataxia, and paranoia, which progressed to seizures, cerebral edema, coma, and death within 3 days. Prior medical history was unremarkable. The patient's asymptomatic 20-year-old daughter presented for prenatal evaluation, and her twin boys were both found to be carriers of a mutation in the OTC gene. The mother was heterozygous for the mutation, but DNA analysis on autopsy samples from her father were unsuccessful. Both baby boys were healthy on a low protein diet. Lien et al. (2007) emphasized the late onset and unusual presentation of OTC deficiency in the older man. |In a review of inherited metabolic disorders and stroke, Testai and Gorelick (2010) noted that patients with urea cycle defects, including CPS1 deficiency (237300), OTC deficiency, and citrullinemia (215700) can rarely have strokes. |Batshaw et al. (2014) reported the results of an analysis of 614 patients with urea cycle disorders (UCDs) enrolled in the Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium's longitudinal study protocol. The most common disorder was ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, accounting for more than half of the participants. The overall prevalence of UCDs in the population was calculated as 1 per 35,000, with two-thirds presenting initial symptoms after the neonatal period. Batshaw et al. (2014) found the mortality rate to be 24% in neonatal-onset cases and 11% in late-onset cases. The most common precipitant of clinical hyperammonemic episodes in the post-neonatal period was intercurrent infections. Elevations in both blood ammonia and glutamine appeared to be biomarkers for neurocognitive outcome. In terms of chronic treatment, low protein diet appeared to result in normal weight but decreased linear growth, while nitrogen scavenger therapy with phenylbutyrate resulted in low levels of branched chain amino acids. Batshaw et al. (2014) found an unexpectedly high risk for hepatic dysfunction in patients with ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency. |Rowe et al. (1986) reviewed 13 symptomatic female heterozygotes. They presented as early as the first week of life or as late as the sixth year. Symptoms before diagnosis were nonspecific: episodic extreme irritability (100%), episodic vomiting and lethargy (100%), protein avoidance (92%), ataxia (77%), stage II coma (46%), delayed growth (38%), developmental delay (38%), and seizures (23%). Onset at the time of weaning from breast milk was frequent. Including the proband, 42% of females in the 13 families had symptoms. |Gilchrist and Coleman (1987) reported 2 heterozygous females who had late onset of severe symptoms. Encephalopathy and focal neurologic deficits began at age 36 years in 1 and at age 38 years in the other. The second had increased urine orotate after a protein meal and had had a lifelong aversion to eating meat, which usually precipitated headaches. |Arn et al. (1989) discussed phenotypic effects of heterozygosity for mutations at the OTC locus. Arn et al. (1990) reported that otherwise normal women who are carriers of a mutant OTC allele are at increased risk for hyperammonemic coma, especially during puerperium. They recommended that any woman who presents with an episode of progressive lethargy and stupor, evidence of acute cortical dysfunction, or coma, especially during pregnancy, be examined for OTC deficiency by pedigree analysis, a search for a history of previous episodes, and the measurement of plasma ammonium and, if immediately available, plasma glutamine levels. The early identification of hyperammonemia provides an opportunity to correct plasma ammonium levels by intravenous therapy with sodium benzoate, sodium phenylacetate, and arginine hydrochloride. |Lee et al. (2002) reported a female infant with skin lesions resembling acrodermatitis enteropathica who was subsequently found to have OTC deficiency. Infectious causes and zinc deficiency were ruled out, and resolution of the eruption occurred after arginine and citrulline supplementation was instituted. |In males with OTC deficiency, sodium valproate may precipitate acute liver failure (Tripp et al., 1981). Hjelm et al. (1986) concluded that the vulnerability of toxic effects of valproate extends to heterozygotes as well. They described a family in which 2 daughters and a son died in childhood, all with clinical features suggesting a metabolic disorder; in one, valproate seemed to have accelerated death. They concluded that the mother was a heterozygote for OTC deficiency. Valproate sensitivity in OTC deficiency is comparable to vincristine neuropathy in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (118200).|Honeycutt et al. (1992) reported a previously undiagnosed heterozygous woman who had symptomatic hyperammonemia during initiation of valproate therapy. Kay et al. (1986) had reported a similar patient. Valproate inhibits ureagenesis and can be toxic to mitochondria. |There is a recognizable congenital phenotype, the fetal valproate syndrome (609442; Winter et al., 1987), which may not be related to OTC deficiency. The features are epicanthic folds, flat nasal bridge, broad nasal base, anteverted nostrils, shallow philtrum, thin upper lip with thick lower lip, and, in some cases, ridging of the metopic suture, congenital heart defect, postaxial polydactyly, and hypospadias. Ardinger et al. (1988) provided verification of the fetal valproate syndrome phenotype. Clayton-Smith and Donnai (1995) reviewed and illustrated the facial features and other clinical findings in sibs whose mother took 1.2 grams of valproate per day while pregnant. While studying the genetic basis of valproate teratogenicity in the mouse, Faiella et al. (2000) discovered that parental factors influence fetal susceptibility to induced malformations. They found that many of these malformations were homeotic transformations. In pluripotent human embryonal carcinoma cells treated with valproate, they found altered expression of specific HOX (see 142950) genes. |
258900::orotic aciduria can be caused by compound heterozygous mutation in the UMPS gene (613891), which encodes a bifunctional enzyme with orotate phosphoribosyltransferase (OPRT) and orotidylic decarboxylase (ODC) activity, on chromosome 3q13.|Orotic aciduria is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by megaloblastic anemia and orotic acid crystalluria that is frequently associated with some degree of physical and mental retardation. These features respond to appropriate pyrimidine replacement therapy, and most cases appear to have a good prognosis. A minority of cases have additional features, particularly congenital malformations and immune deficiencies, which may adversely affect this prognosis (summary by Webster et al., 2001).|Bailey (2009) stated that only 2 cases of orotic aciduria without megaloblastic anemia (OAWA) had been reported.|The phenotypic features of orotic aciduria are megaloblastic anemia that is unresponsive to vitamin B12 and folic acid, hypochromic, microcytic circulating erythrocytes that persist with administration of iron or pyridoxine, large amounts of orotic acid in the urine, and correction of anemia and reduction in orotic acid excretion when uridylic acid and cytidylic acid are administered (Huguley et al., 1959). Fallon et al. (1964) studied extensively the heterozygotes in the first family described (Huguley et al., 1959). A second family was discovered in New Zealand and a third in Texas (Haggard and Lockhart, 1965). In the last patient, urinary obstruction was produced by the high urinary excretion of orotic acid. Rogers et al. (1968) described another case, from North Carolina. |Girot et al. (1983) stated that only 9 cases had been reported; they added 2 more, sibs with a defect in cellular immunity. Humoral immunity was normal. Severe infections had been reported in some patients; 1 died of varicella and another of meningitis. The patients reported by Girot et al. (1983) were Senegalese and the offspring of first cousins. |Becroft et al. (1984) questioned the conclusion of Girot et al. (1983) that immunodeficiency can be an integral feature of orotic aciduria. They provided follow-up on the longest surviving patient, aged 21 years, treated with uridine from the age of 17 months (Becroft et al., 1969). In later years his dose of uridine had been 3 g/d by mouth and he was in good health and had regular employment. No evidence of immunodeficiency was found with or without uridine therapy. |
165720::susceptibility to osteoarthritis-1 (OS1) is conferred by variation in the FRZB gene (605083) on chromosome 2q32.|Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative disease of the joints characterized by degradation of the hyaline articular cartilage and remodeling of the subchondral bone with sclerosis (Meulenbelt et al., 2006). Clinical problems include pain and joint stiffness often leading to significant disability and joint replacement. Osteoarthritis exhibits a clear predilection for specific joints; it appears most commonly in the hip and knee joints and lumbar and cervical spine, as well as in the distal interphalangeal and the first carpometacarpal (base of thumb) and proximal interphalangeal joints of the hand; however, patients with osteoarthritis may have 1, a few, or all of these sites affected (Stefansson et al., 2003). According to a conservative estimate, greater than 70% of the population of the United States at age 65 years is affected by the disease, reflecting its age dependence. |Genetic Heterogeneity of Susceptibility to Osteoarthritis|Susceptibility to osteoarthritis has been associated with variation in other genes: OS2 (140600) with variation in the MATN3 gene (602109) on chromosome 2p24; OS3 (607850) with variation in the ASPN gene (608135) on chromosome 9q22; and OS5 (612400) with variation in the GDF5 gene (601146) on chromosome 20q11.|Other susceptibility loci for osteoarthritis have been mapped to chromosomes 2q33 (OS4; 610839) and 3p24 (OS6; 612401).|
166710::polymorphisms in the COL1A1 gene (120150.0051), the calcitonin receptor gene (CALCR; 114131), and the RIL gene (603422) are associated with osteoporosis. There is evidence that a polymorphism in the ITGB3 gene (173470) is associated with hip fracture.|See BMND1 (601884) for a list of bone mineral density (BMD) quantitative trait loci, some of which have been associated with susceptibility to osteoporosis. Association has been suggested between variation in the ESR1 gene (133430) and BMD.|Using dual-photon absorptiometry, Seeman et al. (1989) demonstrated reduced bone mass in the lumbar spine and perhaps in the femoral neck of premenopausal daughters of postmenopausal women with osteoporotic compression fractures. The findings suggested that genetic factors, expressed as low peak bone mass, may have a role in the development of postmenopausal osteoporosis. Pocock et al. (1987) found in a twin study that the heritability of bone mass was approximately 90% in the lumbar spine and 70% in the femoral neck. Defects in type I collagen of the sort that may lead to osteogenesis imperfecta may produce a picture suggesting idiopathic osteoporosis (see 120150.0038). In studies of vertebral bone density (VBD) in 63 premenopausal women, aged 19 to 40 years, Armamento-Villareal et al. (1992) found a higher proportion of subjects with irregular menses (52% vs 23%, p = 0.03) and a positive family history of osteoporosis (86% vs 61%, p = 0.04) among subjects with low VBD when compared to subjects with normal bone density. They concluded that premenopausal estrogen exposure and possibly genetic predisposition, rather than environmental factors, are the major determinants of peak bone mass before menopause. Seeman et al. (1994) found that the daughters of women with hip fractures show reduced bone density, suggesting that low peak bone density is a leading factor in hip fracture. |
167000::ovarian cancer has been associated with somatic changes in several genes, including OPCML (600632), PIK3CA (171834), AKT1 (164730), CTNNB1 (116806), RRAS2 (600098), CDH1 (192090), ERBB2 (164870), and PARK2 (602544).|See also 607893 for an ovarian cancer susceptibility locus (OVCAS1) that has been mapped to chromosome 3p25-p22.|Familial ovarian cancer may be part of other cancer syndromes. See susceptibility to familial breast-ovarian cancer 1 and 2 (604370 and 612555), due to mutations in the BRCA1 (113705) and BRCA2 (600185) genes, respectively; and Lynch syndrome, also known as hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (see, e.g., HNPCC1; 120435), due to mutations in DNA mismatch repair genes such as MSH2 (609309), MSH3 (600887), MSH6 (600678), and MLH1 (120436).|Ovarian cancer, the leading cause of death from gynecologic malignancy, is characterized by advanced presentation with loco-regional dissemination in the peritoneal cavity and the rare incidence of visceral metastases (Chi et al., 2001). These typical features relate to the biology of the disease, which is a principal determinant of outcome (Auersperg et al., 2001). Epithelial ovarian cancer is the most common form and encompasses 5 major histologic subtypes: papillary serous, endometrioid, mucinous, clear cell, and transitional cell. Epithelial ovarian cancer arises as a result of genetic alterations sustained by the ovarian surface epithelium (Stany et al., 2008; Soslow, 2008). |
602080::susceptibility to Paget disease of bone-2 (PDB2) is conferred by heterozygous mutation in the TNFRSF11A gene (603499), which encodes RANK, on chromosome 18q21.|Heterozygous mutation in the TNFRSF11A gene can also cause familial expansile osteolysis (FEO; 174810), which shows some overlapping features.|Paget disease is a metabolic bone disease characterized by focal abnormalities of increased bone turnover affecting one or more sites throughout the skeleton, primarily the axial skeleton. Bone lesions in this disorder show evidence of increased osteoclastic bone resorption and disorganized bone structure. See reviews by Ralston et al. (2008) and Ralston and Albagha (2014).For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Paget disease of bone, see 167250. |Nakatsuka et al. (2003) reported the clinical features of a 3-generation Japanese family with PDB2 originally reported by Hughes et al. (2000). There were 6 affected individuals, 1 of whom was deceased. The patients presented with skeletal symptoms during their teens and early twenties. Features included pain and bony deformities of the lower limbs, such as bowing, bony enlargement of the proximal and distal interphalangeal joints of the hands, swelling and deformity of the jaw associated with loosening and loss of teeth, and progressive hearing loss. Bone scans showed increased tracer uptake in multiple regions, including the upper and lower limbs, pelvis, vertex of the skull, mandible, and maxilla. Radiographs in more severely affected patients showed expansion and deformity of the affected bones with mixed lytic and sclerotic lesions. Bone biopsy of 1 patient showed increased bone turnover with prominent osteoclast activity and disorganized collagen fibrils. Laboratory studies showed increased alkaline phosphatase. |Whyte et al. (2014) reported a 13-year-old Brazilian girl with a severe form of early-onset PDB2. Prenatal ultrasound showed a short and bowed right femur. She presented at age 3 years with dentoosseous disease, including shedding of the teeth, early resorption of primary tooth roots, and hypoplasia of permanent teeth. She had early-onset deafness associated with missing ossicles and eroded cochleas. Laboratory studies showed markers of increased bone turnover, and radiographs showed thickening in regions of the skull, tubular bone widening, cortical thickening, coarse trabeculation, and osteosclerosis. Osteolytic lesions were not observed. Bone histology showed accelerated remodeling with abundant osteoclasts. The patient developed transient but symptomatic hypercalcemia associated with immobilization. She was diagnosed with juvenile Paget disease; treatment with pamidronate resulted in significant improvement. |
260350::mutations in a number of genes are associated with pancreatic carcinoma, familial or sporadic, germline or somatic.|Pancreatic cancer shows among the highest mortality rates of any cancer, with a 5-year relative survival rate of less than 5%. By the time of initial diagnosis, metastatic disease is commonly present. Established risk factors include a family history of pancreatic cancer, a medical history of diabetes type 2, and cigarette smoking (summary by Amundadottir et al., 2009). |Somatic mutations in pancreatic cancer occur in the KRAS (190070), CDKN2A (600160), MADH4 (600993), TP53 (191170), ARMET (601916), STK11 (602216), ACVR1B (601300), and RBBP8 (604124) genes.|Susceptibility loci for pancreatic cancer include PNCA1 (606856), related to mutation in the PALLD gene on chromosome 4q32 (608092); PNCA2 (613347), related to mutation in the BRCA2 gene on chromosome 13q12 (600185); PNCA3 (613348), related to mutation in the PALB2 gene on chromosome 16p12 (610355); and PNCA4 (614320), related to mutation in the BRCA1 gene on chromosome 17q21 (113705).|Several familial cancer syndromes increase the risk of pancreatic cancer. The best characterized include hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer syndrome (HNPCC; see 120435); hereditary breast-ovarian cancer syndrome due to mutations in BRCA2; Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (175200); the melanoma-pancreatic cancer syndrome (606719), caused by mutations in CDKN2A (600160); von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300), ataxia-telangiectasia (208900) (Swift et al., 1976), and juvenile polyposis syndrome (174900). |Patients with hereditary pancreatitis (167800) resulting from gain-of-function mutations in the protease serine-1 gene (PRSS1; 276000) have a lifetime pancreatic cancer risk ratio of 57 and a cumulative incidence, to age 70 years, of 40% (Lowenfels et al., 1997). |Friedman and Fialkow (1976) observed cancer of the pancreas in 4 brothers from a sibship of 6. Diagnosis was made between ages 66 and 75 years. None had a history of pancreatitis or tumors at other sites. |Reimer et al. (1977) reported pancreatic cancer in father and son. |In a family of European Jewish ancestry, Ehrenthal et al. (1987) identified pancreatic adenocarcinoma in women of 3 successive generations. The diagnosis was histologically confirmed in each case. The youngest of the 3 women presented at age 29, her mother at age 42, and her grandmother at age 76.|Lynch et al. (1995) studied 8 families in which 2 or more first-degree relatives had pancreatic cancer. In the 8 families, 25 pancreatic cancers were found. The mean age of occurrence was 62.8 years, with a range from 45 to 90 years. Parent and child occurrence was observed in 4 of the 8 families. In one family, the progenitor had an affected brother and 5 of his 8 children developed cancer; 2 had pancreatic cancer, 2 had breast cancer (one of these also had pancreatic cancer), and 1 daughter had ovarian cancer. Of the 7 carcinomas available for pathologic review, 6 were typical ductal adenocarcinomas and the seventh was a giant cell variant of ductal carcinoma. |Caldas et al. (1994) quoted Boring et al. (1993) as indicating that pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is the fourth leading cause of cancer death in either sex in the United States, with an estimated incidence in 1993 of nearly 27,700 and a mortality of 24,500. |Evans et al. (1995) described a large pedigree in which pancreatic cancer was inherited as an autosomal dominant. Diabetes and exocrine insufficiency were observed in all family members who eventually developed pancreatic cancer. The presence of diabetes, often years before the diagnosis of cancer, allowed identification of those people who had inherited the predisposing allele. The lack of attacks of abdominal pain seemingly distinguishes the affected members of this family from hereditary pancreatitis (167800) in which diabetes mellitus and pancreatic cancer occur, but the distinction is by no means clear because it was stated that 6 of the 9 persons who developed pancreatic cancer in this family also had a history clinically compatible with pancreatic insufficiency before diagnosis of cancer: weight loss, fatty and foul smelling stools, increased fecal fat, and relief with exogenous pancreatic enzyme supplementation. All 9 members of the family with pancreatic cancer were males. |Making use of pathologic, clinical, and genetic knowledge, Hruban et al. (2000) composed a progression model of pancreatic carcinoma, similar to that developed for colorectal carcinoma. |
167870::The DSM-IV (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) defines panic disorder as the spontaneous, unexpected occurrence of panic attacks followed by persistent concern, worry, and anxiety about having additional panic attacks. Panic attacks are defined as a discrete period of intense fear or discomfort in which at least 4 of 13 symptom criteria are met that develop abruptly and reach a peak within 10 minutes. Some of these criteria include cardiac palpitations, sweating, feelings of choking, fear of losing control, and fear of dying. Panic disorder is divided into panic disorder with or without accompanying agoraphobia. However, agoraphobia can also occur without panic disorder, and panic attacks can occur in the absence of panic disorder. Comorbidity with depressive and addictive disorders is frequent.|Barlow et al. (1994) and Smoller and Tsuang (1998) noted that because the diagnostic criteria remain purely clinical, the nosology of anxiety disorders, such as panic disorder, is controversial and evolving. Therefore, it is difficult to do genetic studies because of the difficulty in delineating overlapping phenotypes within the broader context of anxiety disorders. For example, there may be overlap of panic with specific phobias, variable expressivity of panic and anxiety or depression, or phenocopies within a family. The terms 'anxiety neurosis' and 'phobic neurosis' were used in the past (before the DSM-III in 1980) to encompass all of these disorders. Smoller and Tsuang (1998) suggested that dimensional personality traits, such as shyness, behavioral inhibition, and neuroticism (see 607834), could be used to define an anxiety phenotype. |Schumacher et al. (2011) provided a review of the genetics of panic disorder. They noted that there is high (80%) comorbidity with other psychiatric disorders, including agoraphobia, mood disorders, substance abuse, and other anxiety disorders. Associated personality traits include anxiety sensitivity, behavioral inhibition, neuroticism, and harm avoidance. Women are more susceptible to development of the disorder, which has an average age of onset at 23.6 years. |Genetic Heterogeneity of Susceptibility to Panic Disorder|Susceptibility to panic disorder-1 (PAND1) has been mapped to chromosome 13q. See also PAND2 (607853), mapped to chromosome 9, and PAND3 (609985), mapped to chromosome 4.|
168600::late-onset or sporadic Parkinson disease (PD) can have more than one genetic and/or environmental cause.|Parkinson disease was first described by James Parkinson in 1817. It is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder after Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300), affecting approximately 1% of the population over age 50 (Polymeropoulos et al., 1996). |Warner and Schapira (2003) reviewed the genetic and environmental causes of Parkinson disease. Feany (2004) reviewed the genetics of Parkinson disease and provided a speculative model of interactions among proteins implicated in PD. Lees et al. (2009) provided a review of Parkinson disease, with emphasis on diagnosis, neuropathology, and treatment. |Genetic Heterogeneity of Parkinson Disease|Several loci for autosomal dominant Parkinson disease have been identified, including PARK1 (168601) and PARK4, caused by mutation in or triplication of the alpha-synuclein gene (SNCA; 163890), respectively, on 4q22; PARK5 (191342), caused by mutation in the UCHL1 gene on 4p13; PARK8 (607060), caused by mutation in the LRRK2 gene (609007) on 12q12; PARK11 (607688), caused by mutation in the GIGYF2 gene (612003) on 2q37; PARK13 (610297), caused by mutation in the HTRA2 gene (606441) on 2p13; PARK17 (614203), caused by mutation in the VPS35 gene (601501) on 16q11; and PARK18 (614251), caused by mutation in the EIF4G1 gene (600495) on 3q27.|Several loci for autosomal recessive early-onset Parkinson disease have been identified: PARK2 (600116), caused by mutation in the gene encoding parkin (PARK2; 602544) on 6q26; PARK6 (605909), caused by mutation in the PINK1 gene (608309) on 1p36; PARK7 (606324), caused by mutation in the DJ1 gene (PARK7; 602533) on 1p36; PARK14 (612953), caused by mutation in the PLA2G6 gene (603604) on 22q13; PARK15 (260300), caused by mutation in the FBXO7 gene (605648) on 22q12-q13; PARK19A (615528) and PARK19B (see 615528), caused by mutation in the DNAJC6 gene (608375) on 1p32; and PARK20 (615530), caused by mutation in the SYNJ1 gene (604297) on 21q22.|PARK3 (602404) has been mapped to chromosome 2p13; PARK10 (606852) has been mapped to chromosome 1p34-p32; PARK16 (613164) has been mapped to chromosome 1q32. See also PARK21 (616361). A locus on the X chromosome has been identified (PARK12; 300557). There is also evidence that mitochondrial mutations may cause or contribute to Parkinson disease (see 556500). Susceptibility to the development of the more common late-onset form of Parkinson disease has been associated with polymorphisms or mutations in several genes, including GBA (606463), MAPT (157140), MC1R (155555), ADH1C (103730), and genes at the HLA locus (see, e.g., HLA-DRA, 142860). Each of these risk factors independently may have a modest effect on disease development, but together may have a substantial cumulative effect (Hamza et al., 2010). |Susceptibility to PD may also be conferred by expanded trinucleotide repeats in several genes causing other neurologic disorders usually characterized by spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA), including the ATXN2 (601517), ATXN3 (607047), TBP (600075), and ATXN8OS (603680) genes.|The diagnosis of classic idiopathic PD is primarily clinical, with manifestations including resting tremor, muscular rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability. Additional features are characteristic postural abnormalities, dysautonomia, dystonic cramps, and dementia. The disease is progressive and usually has an insidious onset in mid to late adulthood. Pathologic features of classic PD include by a loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) and the presence of Lewy bodies, intracellular inclusions, in surviving neurons in various areas of the brain, particularly the SN (Nussbaum and Polymeropoulos, 1997). Autosomal recessive juvenile Parkinson disease (PARK2; 600116), however, does not have Lewy body pathology (Nussbaum and Polymeropoulos, 1997). |Many other diseases, both genetic and nongenetic, have parkinsonian motor features ('parkinsonism'), which most likely result from loss or dysfunction of the dopaminergic neurons in the SN, but may or may not have Lewy bodies on pathology. Thus, accurate diagnosis may be difficult without pathologic examination. Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB; 127750) shows parkinsonism with Lewy bodies. However, parkinsonism without Lewy bodies characterizes progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP; 601104), frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism (600274), autosomal dominant (128230) and recessive (605407) forms of Segawa syndrome, X-linked recessive Filipino type of dystonia (314250), multiple systems atrophy, and cerebrovascular disease.|
601466::The ductus venosus is a bypass between the umbilical vein and the inferior vena cava in the fetal circulation. Uchino et al. (1996) noted that functional closure of the ductus venosus starts immediately after birth when the blood pressure in the umbilical vein decreases. Complete functional closure of the ductus venosus occurs in 93% of infants at 2 weeks of age, and this is followed by anatomic closure. Congenital portosystemic venous shunt (PSVS) can result from patent ductus venosus (PDV). |Uchino et al. (1996) described 3 Japanese brothers with progressive deterioration of hepatic function and fatty degeneration of the liver eventually leading to hepatic encephalopathy. Each of them had a congenital intrahepatic portosystemic venous shunt due to a patent ductus venosus. Liver dysfunction and hepatic steatosis reverted to normal with surgical correction of the ductus venosus. These observations suggested that impairment of liver function occurs first in the presence of malnutrition related to a reduction of blood in the portal vein. Hepatic steatosis is a consequence of depleted metabolism of hepatocytes. Congenital portosystemic venous shunt due to a patent ductus venosus appeared to have a genetic background in this family. The parents were nonconsanguineous. Of the 3 brothers, the middle-aged one was first diagnosed. He was well until age 3 years, when his appetite decreased. At the age of 3 years he showed unconsciousness after a febrile episode. Hyperammonemia without hepatosplenomegaly was discovered. Surgical closure of the ductus venosus was performed at age 3 years. At the age of 5 years, the oldest of the 3 brothers had been noted to have transient stupor and nausea after eating meat. Surgical correction of the ductus venosus was performed at age 5.5 years. The youngest of the 3 brothers was found to have elevated serum acid levels at age 5 months. Ultrasonography detected a PDV anatomically similar to that of the 2 older brothers. The shunt ratio was estimated to be 77% by per-rectal portal scintigraphy. Microscopically the liver showed mild fatty degeneration. Uchino et al. (1996) reported that the youngest of the 3 sibs had a high level of blood galactose without enzyme deficiency. This was found on neonatal screening and was an important clue for the diagnosis of PSVS. |Gitzelmann et al. (1992) described hypergalactosemia and portosystemic encephalopathy due to persistence of ductus venosus Arantii. |Jacob et al. (1999) reported 3 adult brothers with patent ductus venosus. The proband was a 43-year-old man with a history of panhypopituitarism who presented with recurrent bouts of pedal edema associated with fatigue, hypoalbuminemia, and elevated prothrombin time. Ultrasound demonstrated attenuation of the main portal vein with diminished intrahepatic branches; CT scan with angiography showed a large collateral vein within the liver consistent with patent ductus venosus. His younger brother, who had been diagnosed with alcohol-related cirrhosis, suffered from intermittent bouts of encephalopathy and was found to have the same vascular lesion. A third brother was found to have patent ductus venosus as well as 2 large hepatic masses consistent with focal nodular hyperplasia. Autosomal recessive or X-linked recessive inheritance was postulated. |
557000::Pearson marrow-pancreas syndrome is a contiguous gene deletion/duplication syndrome involving several mtDNA genes.|Pearson et al. (1979) described a 'new' syndrome of refractory sideroblastic anemia with vacuolization of marrow precursors and exocrine pancreatic dysfunction. Severe, transfusion-dependent, macrocytic anemia began in infancy. Four unrelated patients were observed. The parents and all sibs were hematologically normal. Both sexes were affected. No comment was made concerning parental consanguinity. One child had clinically evident malabsorption. This child and one other had extensive pancreatic fibrosis at autopsy. The other 2 children had findings indicative of pancreatic exocrine dysfunction. Two children had splenic atrophy. Two patients died at 26 and 29 months of age. Two others were alive at 36 and 42 months of age and showed hematologic improvement. The Shwachman syndrome (260400), which this disorder resembles in some ways, has predominantly leukopenia. In the Pearson syndrome the bone marrow has normal cellularity, and vacuolization is distinctive. The pancreas shows fatty replacement in the Shwachman syndrome, fibrosis in the Pearson syndrome. Bone lesions of Shwachman syndrome were not found. Favareto et al. (1989) described 3 patients, in 2 of whom insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus developed during the course of their illness. Favareto et al. (1989) described the differences from Shwachman syndrome, in which bone marrow dysplasia and exocrine pancreas failure also occurs. The disorders differ in bone marrow morphology. The polymorphic nature of the clinical pattern of Pearson syndrome was emphasized, however. Stoddard et al. (1981) reported a case in which severe pancytopenia developed unusually early in life and fibrosis of the thyroid was found at autopsy. |Gibson et al. (1992) detected 3-methylglutaconic aciduria in 4 patients with Pearson syndrome and suggested that this finding may be a useful marker for Pearson syndrome and more specific than other organic acids identified in this disorder. |Rotig et al. (1989) found deletion of the mitochondrial genome in a patient with Pearson syndrome. Two populations of mtDNA were demonstrated, 1 being partly deleted. Specific probes showed that the deletions spanned the genes coding for 4 subunits of NADH dehydrogenase, 1 subunit of cytochrome oxidase, and 1 subunit of ATPase. The deletion spanned 4,977 bp. The presence of short repeats at the boundaries of the deleted sequence may not be fortuitous; these direct repeats may promote intramolecular recombination, deletions, or duplications in human mtDNA. Rotig et al. (1989) were prompted to study mitochondrial DNA in 2 patients because of persistent metabolic acidosis and a high blood lactate in early infancy. |Rotig et al. (1990) reported 5 patients with Pearson marrow-pancreas syndrome who presented with permanent metabolic acidosis and increased ketone body or lactate/pyruvate molar ratios in plasma. Polarographic studies showed that oxygen consumption by intact lymphocytes was defective and that oxidation of NADH in fragmented lymphocytes was greatly reduced. Oxidation of succinate and cytochrome c was altered to a varying extent. A mixed population of normal and deleted mitochondrial genomes was present in all tissues tested, but different proportions of deleted mtDNA molecules were noted. In 1 patient, a deletion-duplication was found. In the other 4 patients, deletions were found. In 1 of the deletion patients, ND4 and ND5 were deleted. In the other 3, a more extensive deletion extending from A6 to ND5 was observed. |In a patient who had features of Pearson syndrome and who later developed features of Kearns-Sayre syndrome (530000), McShane et al. (1991) showed mtDNA heteroplasmy for a deletion of 4.9 kb. Larsson et al. (1990) described a patient heteroplasmic for deletion in mtDNA who recovered spontaneously from infantile sideroblastic anemia of the type seen in Pearson syndrome but who subsequently developed the features of Kearns-Sayre syndrome. |In a study of 9 unrelated children, including the patient originally reported by Pearson et al. (1979), Rotig et al. (1991) found 5 different types of direct repeats at the boundaries of the mtDNA deletions and provided evidence for conservation of the 3-prime-repeated sequence in the deletions. Rotig et al. (1990) confirmed the presence of mtDNA deletion in a lymphoblastoid cell line from a patient originally reported by Pearson et al. (1979). |Majander et al. (1991) demonstrated mtDNA deletion in an infant with a variant of Pearson syndrome. |Baerlocher et al. (1992) described an 8-year-old boy with Pearson syndrome who showed the typical hematologic symptoms in early infancy. During his later course, increased CSF protein, ptosis, and retinitis pigmentosa pointed to the Kearns-Sayre syndrome, another mtDNA deletion disorder. Analysis of leukocyte mtDNA revealed a 5.5-kb mtDNA deletion similar to that found in at least 5 other patients with Pearson syndrome (Rotig et al., 1990). |Superti-Furga et al. (1993) reported a patient with Pearson syndrome with multiple organ involvement, fatal course, and a combination of increased amount, partial deletion, and duplication of mtDNA. In addition to small birth weight, connatal hypoplastic anemia, vacuolized bone marrow precursors, and failure to thrive, the patient subsequently developed insulin-dependent diabetes, renal Fanconi syndrome, lactic acidosis, and complex organic aciduria. The clinical course was progressive and death occurred at age 19 months. A high proportion of mtDNA molecules with deletion of nucleotides 9238 to 15575 were identified in several tissues; about half of the shortened mtDNA molecules were concatenated to form circular dimers. The experience indicated that Pearson syndrome is a disorder not confined to bone marrow and pancreas but rather a multiorgan disorder. The tissue distribution and relative proportions of abnormal mtDNA molecules apparently determined the phenotype and the clinical course. |Casademont et al. (1994) described 2 brothers with a clinical picture resembling Pearson syndrome and characterized by sideroblastic anemia, mild pancreatic insufficiency, and progressive muscle weakness. The presence of an associated permanent basal lactic acidemia raised the suspicion of a mitochondrial disease. Muscle biopsy in both sibs showed ragged-red fibers and reduced activity of complexes I, III, and IV of the respiratory chain. Studies of mtDNA disclosed multiple deletions both in skeletal muscle and, to a lesser extent, in leukocytes. Similar, but not identical deletions were also present in the leukocytes and muscle from their mother. Deletions were flanked by short direct repeats. Casademont et al. (1994) concluded that this disorder was probably an autosomal dominant. They commented on the fact that a phenotypic shift from a predominantly hematopoietic disorder (Pearson syndrome) to a disease with overt muscle dysfunction (mitochondrial myopathy) had been observed, with the eventual evolution to a full picture of Kearns-Sayre syndrome, depending on the distribution of deleted mtDNA. The existence of an autosomal dominant mitochondrial DNA breakage syndrome (157640) seems well established. |Cursiefen et al. (1998) described bilateral zonular cataract in a 6-year-old boy with Pearson syndrome. At the age of 3 years, the boy had developed strabismus secondary to bilateral zonular cataract. |Krauch et al. (2002) described a 5-year-old girl who developed, in addition to the typical features of Pearson syndrome, worsening cardiac function, mainly affecting the left ventricle. Hitherto, cardiac involvement had not been regarded as a major feature of Pearson syndrome. The diagnosis was proved by the finding of pleioplasmatic rearrangement of mitochondrial DNA, including a combination of deletion and duplication, in blood cells. |Shanske et al. (2002) noted that single deletions of mtDNA are associated with 3 major clinical conditions: Kearns-Sayre syndrome (530000), Pearson syndrome, and progressive external ophthalmoplegia (157640). Typically, single mtDNA deletions are sporadic events occurring in isolated members of a family. Shanske et al. (2002) described the case of a woman who presented with progressive external ophthalmoplegia, ptosis, and weakness of pharyngeal, facial, neck, and limb muscles. She had 2 unaffected children, but another of her children, an infant son, had sideroblastic anemia, was diagnosed with Pearson syndrome, and died at 1 year of age. Morphologic analysis of a muscle biopsy sample from the mother showed cytochrome c oxidase-negative ragged-red fibers, a typical pattern in patients with mtDNA deletions. Southern blot analysis using multiple restriction endonucleases and probed with multiple mtDNA fragments showed that both the mother and her infant son harbored an identical 5,355-bp single deletion in mtDNA, without flanking direct repeats. The deletion was the only abnormal species of mtDNA identified in both patients, and there was no evidence for duplications. Thus, although most single large-scale deletions in mtDNA are sporadic, single deletions can be transmitted through the germline in rare cases. |Jacobs et al. (2004) reported a patient with a novel mitochondrial DNA deletion of 3.4 kb ranging from nucleotide 6097 to 9541 in combination with deletion dimers. The mutation percentage in different tissues (blood, muscle, and liver) varied between 64% and 95%. After a remission period of about a year, the patient died suddenly at the age of 3 years owing to severe lactic acidosis. A second patient with a previously reported deletion of 8 kb and a milder phenotype was found to have mitochondrial duplications and died at the age of 10 years. Jacobs et al. (2004) suggested that duplications, in contrast to dimerizations, may lead to a better life expectancy and less severe phenotype with Kearns-Sayre-like symptoms. |
312080::Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is caused by mutation in the PLP1 gene (300401), which encodes proteolipid protein-1, on chromosome Xq22.Spastic paraplegia-2 (SPG2; 312920) is an allelic disorder.|Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease is an X-linked recessive hypomyelinative leukodystrophy (HLD1) in which myelin is not formed properly in the central nervous system. PMD is characterized clinically by nystagmus, spastic quadriplegia, ataxia, and developmental delay (Inoue, 2005). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Hypomyelinating Leukodystrophy|Other forms of hypomyelinating leukodystrophy include HLD2 (608804), caused by mutation in the GJC2/GJA12 gene (608803) on chromosome 1q41; HLD3 (260600), caused by mutation in the AIMP1 gene (603605) on chromosome 4q24; HLD4 (612233), caused by mutation in the HSPD1 gene (118190) on chromosome 2q33.1; and HLD5 (610532), caused by mutation in the FAM126A gene (610531) on chromosome 7p15; HLD6 (612438), caused by mutation in the TUBB4A gene (602662) on chromosome 19p13; HLD7 (607694), caused by mutation in the POLR3A gene (614258) on chromosome 10q22; HLD8 (614381), caused by mutation in the POLR3B gene (614366) on chromosome 12q23; HLD9 (616140), caused by mutation in the RARS gene (107820) on chromosome 5; HLD10 (616420), caused by mutation in the PYCR2 gene (616406) on chromosome 1q42; HLD11 (616494), caused by mutation in the POLR1C gene (610060) on chromosome 6p21; HLD12 (616683), caused by mutation in the VPS11 gene (608549) on chromosome 11q23; HLD13 (616881) caused by mutation in the HIKESHI gene (614908) on chromosome 11q14; HLD14 (617899), caused by mutation in the UFM1 gene (610553) on chromosome 13q13; HLD15 (617951), caused by mutation in the EPRS gene (138295) on chromosome 1q41; HLD16 (617964), caused by mutation in the TMEM106B gene (613413) on chromosome 7p21; and HLD17 (618006), caused by mutation in the AIMP2 gene (600859) on chromosome 7p22.|Tyler (1958) noted that at first, rotary movements of the head and eyes develop but curiously may later disappear. Affected children in these families were sometimes described as 'head nodders' and 'eye waggers.' Spasticity of the legs and later the arms, cerebellar ataxia, dementia, and parkinsonian symptoms are other features developing over the first decade or two of life. |Ford (1960) referred to Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease as the chronic infantile type of diffuse cerebral sclerosis. PMD begins in infancy as early as the eighth day and usually no later than the third month and is very slowly progressive so that the victim may survive to middle age. Initial symptoms are pendular eye movements, head shaking, hypotonia, choreoathetosis, and pyramidal signs. The myelin of the peripheral nervous system is not involved in nerve conduction and velocities are normal.|Renier et al. (1981) recognized 3 types of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. (1) The classic type, with onset in infancy and death in late adolescence or young adulthood, is characterized by initial signs of nystagmoid eye movement and jerking and rolling head movements or head tremor. Nystagmus disappears and, as the patient matures, ataxia, spasticity, and involuntary movements become manifest, as well as optic atrophy, microcephaly, and subnormal somatic development. (2) The connatal type shows rapid progression and is fatal in infancy or childhood. (3) The transitional form is intermediate. Stridor in early life is a manifestation in some cases of PMD. A possible relation of the X-linked laryngeal abductor paralysis with mental deficiency (308850) to the connatal form was proposed. |Kaye et al. (1994) reported 2 brothers who demonstrated neonatal hypotonia and hyporeflexia and were found to have mutations in the PLP1 gene. The authors suggested that peripheral nervous system myelin may be affected in PMD, yielding a clinical picture suggestive of spinal muscular atrophy. |One of the patients of Pelizaeus (1885) lived to 52 years of age, and in the family reported by Tyler (1958) an affected male was still living at age 51. Johnson et al. (1991) studied a 5-generation family in which 6 persons had PMD type I. One patient was 45 years old at the time of report. 'Wavering eyes' and 'floppy head' were noted at the age of a few weeks as the first sign. |Hanefeld et al. (2005) performed quantitative proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) on 5 children with genetically confirmed PMD. Compared to age-matched controls, affected white matter in PMD patients resembled the metabolite pattern of cortical gray matter, as indicated by increased concentrations of N-acetylaspartate and N-acetylaspartylglutamate, glutamine, myoinositol, and creatine and phosphocreatine. The concentration of choline-containing compounds was reduced. The findings were consistent with enhanced neuroaxonal density, astrogliosis, and reduction of oligodendroglia, suggestive of dys- and hypomyelination. |Stevenson et al. (2009) reported follow-up of a 2-generation African American family with X-linked spastic paraplegia, originally reported by Arena et al. (1992). Arena et al. (1992) described 5 affected males who had severe mental retardation, lower limb spasticity and atrophy, absent or dysarthric speech, and impaired ambulation requiring wheelchairs from childhood. Other features included nystagmus, dystonic posturing, and ataxia. Brain imaging studies showed macrogyria, lack of myelination, and increased paramagnetic signal suggestive of iron deposition. Stevenson et al. (2009) identified a hemizygous mutation in the PLP1 gene (D58Y; 300401.0027) in all affected individuals, confirming that the disorder was in fact PMD. Stevenson et al. (2009) noted that, although altered signals in the basal ganglia and thalamus are not specific for iron deposition, MRI findings suggestive of iron deposition in the basal ganglia have been reported in other patients with PMD. |Some heterozygous females have manifestations of the disorder. The brain of such a female in the family reported by Merzbacher (1909) was studied by Spielmeyer (cited by Tyler, 1958) with demonstration of changes. In a large family in which PMD was segregating (reported by Zeman et al., 1964) and linked to a mutation in PLP by Trofatter et al. (1989), Hodes et al. (1995) observed a heterozygous female infant with typical neurologic signs and with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and brain auditory evoked response consistent with the diagnosis of PMD. The mother and grandmother, who were likewise heterozygous for the leu14-to-pro mutation (300401.0003), were neurologically normal and showed normal MRIs of the brain. |Warshawsky et al. (2005) reported a 49-year-old woman with a history of progressive gait disturbance, white matter disease, and CSF immunoglobulin abnormalities who met criteria for primary progressive multiple sclerosis (MS; 126200). She and her son, who died at age 10 years of an unknown congenital neurodevelopmental disorder, were found to have a mutation in the PLP1 gene, confirming a diagnosis of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. Warshawsky et al. (2005) noted that the finding of an affected mother of a severely affected boy with PMD was contrary to the current belief that mothers of severely affected sons are asymptomatic as adults. |Carrier females with the submicroscopic duplication in the PLP gene that causes PMD are usually asymptomatic. Inoue et al. (2001) described 2 unrelated female patients who presented with mild PMD or spastic paraplegia. In 1 patient, clinical features as well as cranial magnetic resonance imaging and brainstem auditory evoked potential results improved dramatically over a 10-year period. The other patient, who presented with spastic diplegia and was initially diagnosed with cerebral palsy, also showed clinical improvement. Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses identified a PLP gene duplication in both patients. The same analyses in family members indicated that the duplication in both patients occurred as a de novo event. Neither skewing of X inactivation in the peripheral lymphocytes nor PLP gene coding alterations were identified in either patient. These findings indicated that females with a PLP gene duplication can occasionally manifest an early-onset neurologic phenotype. Inoue et al. (2001) hypothesized that the remarkable clinical improvement was a result of myelin compensation by oligodendrocytes expressing 1 copy of the PLP gene secondary to selection for a favorable X-inactivation pattern. These findings indicated plasticity of oligodendrocytes in the formation of central nervous system myelin and suggested a potential role for stem cell transplantation therapies. |Using clinical data compiled from a chart review at Wayne State University comprising 40 pedigrees with PMD including 55 males and 56 carrier females, Hurst et al. (2006) investigated neurologic symptoms in carrier females. They categorized patients according to disease severity and type of genetic lesion within the PLP1 gene and then analyzed the clinical data using nonparametric t tests and analyses of variance. Hurst et al. (2006) concluded that their analyses formally demonstrated the link between mild disease in males and symptoms in carrier female relatives. Conversely, mutations causing severe disease in males rarely caused clinical signs in carrier females. The greatest risk of disease in females was found for nonsense/indel or null mutations. Missense mutations carried moderate risk. The lowest risk, which represents the bulk of families with PMD, was associated with PLP1 gene duplications. Hurst et al. (2006) concluded that effective genetic counseling of PMD and spastic paraplegia carrier females must include an assessment of disease severity in affected male relatives. |Marble et al. (2007) reported 2 brothers with classic PMD resulting from a truncating mutation in the PLP1 gene. Three carrier females in the family developed clumsiness, excessive falling, and gait disturbances in the fourth decade of life. Other clinical findings included hyperreflexia, wide-based gait, tremor, and extensor plantar responses. There was also mild cognitive deterioration. X-inactivation studies showed mild skewing (85:15) only in 1 of the carriers. |
274600::Pendred syndrome (PDS) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SLC26A4 gene (605646) on chromosome 7q.|There is evidence that Pendred syndrome may also rarely be caused by digenic inheritance of a heterozygous mutation in the SLC26A4 gene and a heterozygous mutation in the FOXI1 gene (601093).|Mutation in the SLC26A4 gene can also cause autosomal recessive deafness-4 (DFNB4; 600791) with enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA).|Pendred syndrome, the most common syndromal form of deafness, is an autosomal recessive disorder associated with developmental abnormalities of the cochlea, sensorineural hearing loss, and diffuse thyroid enlargement (goiter) (Everett et al., 1997). |For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of thyroid dyshormonogenesis, see TDH1 (274400).|A mild type of organification defect is associated with congenital deafness. Patients show only partial discharge of iodide (25 to 50%) when thiocyanate or perchlorate is given (Fraser et al., 1960). Their thyroids are moderately enlarged from childhood. Patients are usually euthyroid, although an exaggerated response to thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH; 613879) suggests a compensated hypothyroidism (Gomez-Pan et al., 1974); mental retardation has been reported (Thompson et al., 1970). Massa et al. (2003) found that a solitary thyroid nodule may be the presenting feature. Thyroid carcinoma has been observed (Thieme, 1957; Elman, 1958; Milutinovic et al., 1969); because of the characteristically 'wild' histology, malignancy may be incorrectly diagnosed. The deafness is neurosensory in type and sometimes associated with defective vestibular function. The deafness may be present at birth or develop in early childhood. Batsakis and Nishiyama (1962) estimated that Pendred syndrome accounts for 1 to 10% of hereditary deafness. |Illum et al. (1972) reported 15 cases. They showed a pedigree in which 8 proven cases and several presumed cases occurred in 3 generations of a family in a pseudodominant pattern (same family as that of Johnsen, 1958). In 1 patient, histologic examination showed a Mondini type malformation of the cochlea (i.e., only the basal cochlear turn was retained while the apical turns formed a common cavity). In 6 and perhaps 7 of the other 14 cases, the same defect was demonstrated by tomography of the temporal bones in the axial-pyramidal projection. The authors suggested that peroxidase deficiency may be responsible for the cochlear lesion as well as the thyroid defect. |Peroxidase activity is normal in Pendred syndrome (Burrow et al., 1973; Ljunggren et al., 1973; Cave and Dunn, 1975). There appear to be different varieties of Pendred syndrome, because Hollander et al. (1964) found a defect involving, apparently, an abnormal condensation of iodotyrosines to form iodothyronines, rather than an inadequate iodination of tyrosine. Milutinovic et al. (1969) found about 80% of the protein-bound radioiodine in the normal 19S human thyroglobulin fraction from a Pendred gland. On the other hand, Medeiros-Neto et al. (1968) found less than 15% in the 19S fraction. Desai et al. (1974) found a 15.2-16.8S radioiodinated thyroidal protein with immunologic properties of normal thyroglobulin. Fraser (1967) raised the question of whether the organification defect without deafness, as described by Stanbury and Hedge (1950) and later by Furth et al. (1967), was different from the organification defect with deafness as described by Pendred. He proposed that variability in severity of the same defect may be involved and supported this contention with a description of a patient with unilateral deafness whose sister had Pendred syndrome and bilateral deafness. Also, cases of the full syndrome and cases with near-normal hearing occurred in the same family. |Cremers et al. (1998) described a boy whose bilateral sensorineural hearing loss progressed rapidly from about 50 to 60 decibels at the age of 3 years and 3 months to more than 100 decibels at the age of 4 years and 4 months. A search for the cause of the progressive hearing loss led to discovery of dysplasia of the cochlea and a widened vestibular aqueduct. Thyroid function tests were normal, but thyroglobulin (TG; 188450) was elevated. The diagnosis of Pendred syndrome was confirmed by the positive results of a potassium perchlorate test, indicating defective organic binding of the iodine in the thyroid gland. A widened vestibular aqueduct occurs also in branchiootorenal dysplasia (113650). |Phelps et al. (1998) presented data on the radiologic malformations of the ear in 40 patients, all complying with strict diagnostic criteria for Pendred syndrome. Deficiency of the interscalar septum in the distal coils of the cochlea (Mondini deformity) was found to be common but probably not a constant feature of Pendred syndrome. On the other hand, enlargement of the endolymphatic sac and duct in association with a large vestibular aqueduct was present in all 20 patients examined by MRI. Phelps et al. (1998) concluded that thin section high resolution MRI on a T2 protocol in the axial and sagittal planes is the imaging investigation of choice in this disorder. They concluded that 'if there is uncertainty about cochlear malformation being a constant feature of Pendred syndrome, there can be little doubt as to the importance of enlarged vestibular aqueduct, endolymphatic sac, and endolymphatic duct, which were almost constant features' in their series. |Neither Pendred syndrome patients nor pendrin (605646)-deficient knockout mice had been reported to develop overt acid-base disturbances, such as metabolic alkalosis. Royaux et al. (2001) demonstrated that pendrin is an apical anion transporter in intercalated cells of the cortical collecting ducts of the kidney and has an essential role in renal bicarbonate secretion. The fact that patients have not shown abnormalities with reference to the kidney probably reflects the fact that the kidney has other means of regulating bicarbonate excretion. Overt abnormalities in acid-base balance in pendrin-deficient humans may be induced under conditions of extensive alkali loading or severe metabolic alkalosis. |
260800::pentosuria (PNTSU) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the DCXR gene (608347) on chromosome 17q25.|Essential pentosuria is an inborn error of metabolism in which 1 to 4 gm of the pentose L-xylulose is excreted in the urine each day. It is a benign condition that occurs principally in individuals of Ashkenazi Jewish descent (summary by Hiatt, 2001).|
170650::aggressive periodontitis-1 is caused by homozygous mutation in the CTSC gene (602365) on chromosome 11q14.|Aggressive periodontitis, which may be generalized or localized, is characterized by severe and protracted gingival infections, leading to tooth loss. Amounts of microbial deposits are generally inconsistent with the severity of periodontal tissue destruction and the progression of attachment and bone loss may be self arresting (American Academy of Periodontology, 2000). The term 'aggressive periodontitis' replaced the terms 'early-onset,' 'prepubertal,' or 'juvenile periodontitis' at a 1999 International workshop for a classification of periodontal disease and conditions, where it was decided that the classification terminology should not be age dependent or require knowledge of rates of progression (Armitage, 1999).|Genetic Heterogeneity of Aggressive Periodontitis|Aggressive periodontitis-2 (608526) has been mapped to chromosome 1q25.|Jorgenson et al. (1975) described periodontitis in 3 (1 male) of 7 sibs in a black family. They found 12 reports of families with more than 1 affected child and unaffected parents. In 3 of the families the parents were first cousins. In 1 family, a first cousin was affected. Three pairs of like-sex twins were concordant for the trait. Rao et al. (1979) could detect no evidence of significant heritability. |Saxen and Nevanlinna (1984) studied 30 families. None of the 60 parents had any sign of the disorder. Of the 52 sibs, 9 (in 7 families) were affected. The findings were considered compatible with autosomal recessive inheritance. |Long et al. (1987) studied 37 kindreds with 2 rare types of familial periodontitis: a localized form usually diagnosed in late adolescence and a more generalized form with a later mean age of diagnosis. They found several families in which both forms occurred, making it unlikely that these 2 varieties have unrelated genetic causes. |Shapira et al. (1997) described a family with prepubertal periodontitis in several members in 3 generations. Localized and generalized forms were found in sibs. Variability in disease expression was further indicated by the fact that a pair of monozygotic twins were similarly but not identically affected.|
214100::this form of Zellweger syndrome (PBD1A) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the PEX1 gene (602136) on chromosome 7q21.|Zellweger syndrome is an autosomal recessive systemic disorder characterized clinically by severe neurologic dysfunction, craniofacial abnormalities, and liver dysfunction, and biochemically by the absence of peroxisomes. Most severely affected individuals with classic Zellweger syndrome phenotype die within the first year of life (summary by Wanders, 2004). |Zellweger syndrome' is the prototype of a large group of peroxisomal disorders, which can be classified into 2 main groups: (1) disorders of peroxisome biogenesis and (2) single peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies (see 264470). The peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBDs) fall into 4 main phenotypic classes. Three of them, Zellweger syndrome, neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD), and infantile Refsum disease (IRD), have multiple complementation groups and form a spectrum of overlapping features, with the most severe being the Zellweger syndrome and the least severe infantile Refsum disease. The fourth group, rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP1; 215100), is a distinct PBD phenotype (summary by Moser et al., 1995, Wanders, 2004). |Heimler syndrome, a rare autosomal recessive disorder encompassing sensorineural hearing loss, enamel hypoplasia of the secondary dentition, and nail abnormalities, represents a discrete phenotypic entity at the mildest end of the PBD spectrum (Ratbi et al., 2015). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Zellweger Syndrome|Zellweger syndrome (denoted by the suffix 'A' in the symbol) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder and can be caused by mutation in any one of several genes, known as pexins, involved in peroxisome biogenesis. The pexin (PEX) genes encode proteins essential for the assembly of functional peroxisomes (summary by Distel et al., 1996). Forms of Zellweger syndrome include PBD1A, caused by mutation in the PEX1 gene on chromosome 7q21; PBD2A (214110), caused by mutation in the PEX5 (600414) gene on chromosome 12p13; PBD3A (614859), caused by mutation in the PEX12 (601758) gene on chromosome 17; PBD4A (614862), caused by mutation in the PEX6 (601498) gene on chromosome 6p21; PBD5A (614866), caused by mutation in the PEX2 (170993) gene on chromosome 8q21; PBD6A (614870), caused by mutation in the PEX10 (602859) gene on chromosome 1p36; PBD7A (614872), caused by mutation in the PEX26 (608666) gene on chromosome 22q11; PBD8A (614876), caused by mutation in the PEX16 (603360) gene on chromosome 11p12; PBD10A (614882), caused by mutation in the PEX3 (603164) gene on chromosome 6q23-q24; PBD11A (614883), caused by mutation in the PEX13 (601789) gene on chromosome 2p15; PBD12A (614886), caused by mutation in the PEX19 (600279) gene on chromosome 1q22; and PBD13A (614887), caused by mutation in the PEX14 gene (601791) on chromosome 1p36.2. |Mutation in the pexin genes also causes the less severe phenotypes of neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD) and infantile Refsum disease (IRD); see PBD1B (601539) for a phenotypic description and discussion of genetic heterogeneity of these PBDs.|Heimler syndrome-1 (HMLR1; 234580) and -2 (HMLR2; 616617) are caused by mutation in the PEX1 and PEX6 genes, respectively.|The rhizomelic chondrodysplasia subtype of PBD (RCDP1, PBD9; 215100), and a PBD without rhizomelia (PBD9B; 614879), are caused by mutation in the PEX7 gene (601757) on chromosome 6q22-q24.|In addition to the defects in peroxisome assembly, Distel et al. (1996) noted that peroxisomal disorders include a number of single peroxisomal enzyme deficiencies: X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD; 300100), acyl-coenzyme A oxidase deficiency (264470), DHAPAT deficiency (222765), alkyl-DHAP synthase deficiency (600121), glutaric aciduria type III (231690), classic Refsum disease (266500), hyperoxaluria type I (259900), and acatalasia (115500). A peroxisomal and mitochondrial fission defect results in a lethal encephalopathy (EMPF; 614388). |Bowen et al. (1964) described 2 families, each with 2 sibs displaying an unusual malformation syndrome. Cardinal features were failure to thrive, absent or weak sucking and swallowing, finger flexion, congenital glaucoma, malformed ears, small mandible, heart malformations, enlarged clitoris, hypospadias, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and death at an early age. No parental consanguinity was demonstrated in either family, and no chromosomal abnormality was identified. Opitz et al. (1969), who described further cases, suggested that only 1 of the 2 sets of sibs reported by Bowen et al. (1964) (the pair contributed by Zellweger) had the cerebrohepatorenal syndrome; however, in a review, Wanders (2004) noted that both families had Zellweger syndrome. Opitz et al. (1969) suggested the eponymic designation 'Zellweger syndrome,' and made the important observation that serum iron level and iron binding capacity were high in one well-studied case and may provide an easy method for diagnosis of this disorder. A defect in the placental iron transfer mechanism was postulated. |Smith et al. (1965) described a Caucasian brother and sister who died at 8 and 10 weeks of age with aberrant development of the skull, face, ears, eyes, hands and feet, polycystic kidneys with adequate functional renal parenchyma, and intrahepatic biliary dysgenesis. Jaundice developed before death. The karyotype was normal. |Passarge and McAdams (1967) described 5 sisters out of a sibship of 13 with severe, generalized hypotonia and absent Moro response, characteristic craniofacial abnormalities, cortical renal cysts, and hepatomegaly. The brain in 2, studied histologically, showed sudanophilic leukodystrophy. The authors considered this to be the same entity as that reported by Smith et al. (1965) and perhaps the same as that described by Bowen et al. (1964). They proposed 'cerebrohepatorenal syndrome' as an appropriate designation. |Chondral calcification, most marked in the patellas, was a feature pointed out by Poznanski et al. (1970). The change is somewhat like that of chondrodystrophia calcificans congenita. Patton et al. (1972) described 2 cases with the additional feature of thymic anomalies. Abnormalities of iron metabolism were not present. Volpe and Adams (1972) observed a defect in neuronal migration. |Mathis et al. (1978) observed cholestasis in the cerebrohepatorenal syndrome, and electron microscopy of liver biopsy showed mitochondrial abnormalities Pathologic findings were presented by Friedman et al. (1980). |Minor opacities in the ocular lenses in heterozygotes were described by Hittner et al. (1981). |Bleeker-Wagemakers et al. (1986) reported a 13-year-old girl with clinical and biochemical features consistent with Zellweger syndrome. She had severe mental retardation, tapetoretinal degeneration, and sensorineural hearing loss. |Zung et al. (1990) suggested that this disorder was unusually frequent among Karaites in Israel. In addition to dysmyelination, there was also neuronal migration derangements resulting in microgyria/pachygyria, heterotopias, and dysplasias of the inferior olive. |Van Woerden et al. (2006) reviewed the medical charts of 31 Dutch Zellweger spectrum disorder patients with prolonged survival (greater than 1 year). Urinary oxylate excretion was assessed in 23 and glycolate in 22 patients. Hyperoxaluria was present in 19 (83%) and hyperglycolic aciduria in 14 (64%). Pyridoxine treatment in 6 patients did not reduce the oxalate excretion, as in some patients with primary hyperoxaluria type 1 (259900). Renal involvement with urolithiasis and nephrocalcinosis was present in 5, of which 1 developed end-stage renal disease. Van Woerden et al. (2006) concluded that the presence of hyperoxaluria, potentially leading to severe renal involvement, was statistically significantly correlated with the severity of neurologic dysfunction, and that Zellweger spectrum disorder patients should be screened by urinalysis for hyperoxaluria and renal ultrasound for nephrocalcinosis in order to take timely measures to prevent renal insufficiency. |
261600::phenylketonuria (PKU) and non-PKU mild hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) result from mutations in the PAH gene (612349).|Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism resulting from a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH; 612349), an enzyme that catalyzes the hydroxylation of phenylalanine to tyrosine, the rate-limiting step in phenylalanine catabolism. If undiagnosed and untreated, phenylketonuria can result in impaired postnatal cognitive development resulting from a neurotoxic effect of hyperphenylalaninemia (Zurfluh et al., 2008). See Scriver (2007) and Blau et al. (2010) for detailed reviews of PKU. |Early diagnosis of phenylketonuria, a cause of mental retardation, is important because it is treatable by dietary means. Features other than mental retardation in untreated patients include a 'mousy' odor; light pigmentation; peculiarities of gait, stance, and sitting posture; eczema; and epilepsy (Paine, 1957). Kawashima et al. (1988) suggested that cataracts and brain calcification may be frequently overlooked manifestations of classic untreated PKU. Brain calcification has been reported in dihydropteridine reductase (DHPR) deficiency (261630). Pitt and O'Day (1991) found only 3 persons with cataracts among 46 adults, aged 28 to 71 years, with untreated PKU. They concluded that PKU is not a cause of cataracts. Levy et al. (1970) screened the serum of 280,919 'normal' teenagers and adults whose blood had been submitted for syphilis testing. Only 3 adults with the biochemical findings of PKU were found. Each was mentally subnormal. Normal mentality is very rare among patients with phenylketonuria who have not received dietary therapy. |Evidence of heterogeneity in phenylketonuria was presented by Auerbach et al. (1967) and by Woolf et al. (1968). |Coskun et al. (1990) observed scleroderma in 2 infants with PKU. Improvement in the skin lesions after commencement of a low phenylalanine diet supported the possibility of a causal relationship.|Widespread screening of neonates for phenylketonuria brought to light a class of patients with a disorder of phenylalanine metabolism milder than that in PKU. These patients show serum phenylalanine concentrations well below those in PKU, but still several times the normal. PKU and hyperphenylalaninemia breed true in families (Kaufman et al., 1975), each behaving as an autosomal recessive. Kaufman et al. (1975) studied liver biopsies from patients with HPA and their parents. The patients with HPA had levels of phenylalanine hydroxylase about 5% of normal. |Burgard et al. (1996) found that all patients but one who had predicted in vitro residual enzyme activity greater than 20% had mild PKU, while those with predicted in vitro residual enzyme activity less than 20% were identified as having classical PKU. The authors stated that 'the difficulties of some patients to adjust their blood Phe level according to their target value although they comply with the dietary recommendations might be caused by low residual enzyme activity.' In addition, when considering the R261Q (612349.0006) mutation (a mutation with a considerable amount of residual enzyme activity, which produced higher Phe levels than expected), they hypothesized a negative intraallelic complementation effect as an explanation for higher than expected diagnostic Phe values. |Mildly depressed IQ is common in treated PKU. Griffiths et al. (2000) analyzed IQ scores collected from 57 British children with early-treated classic PKU using variants of the Wechsler intelligence scale for children (WISC) in relation to indicators of dietary control such as serum phenylalanine levels and socioeconomic factors. The authors found that, after correcting for socioeconomic status, phenylalanine control at age 2 was predictive of overall IQ, although early and continuous treatment did not necessarily lead to normalization of overall IQ. Subscale analysis revealed normalized verbal IQ in those children with phenylalanine levels of less than 360 micromol/l during infancy (the recommended UK upper limit), but performance IQ remained depressed. |Weglage et al. (2000) compared 42 PKU patients, aged 10 to 18 years, with 42 diabetic patients matched for sex, age, and socioeconomic status. Patients' groups were compared with a control sample of healthy controls (2,900 individuals) from an epidemiologic study. The Child Behavior Check List, IQ tests, and monitoring of blood phenylalanine concentrations and HBA1 concentrations were used. Weglage et al. (2000) found that internalizing problems such as depressive mood, anxiety, physical complaints, or social isolation were significantly elevated in both PKU and diabetic patients, whereas externalizing problems were not. The 2 patient groups did not differ significantly either in the degree or in the pattern of their psychologic profile. |In a retrospective study from birth in 13 patients with classic PKU, Barat et al. (2002) found greater variation of phenylalanine levels and a higher mean of cumulative variations in the 8 osteopenic patients than in 5 nonosteopenic patients. Barat et al. (2002) suggested that serum phenylalanine variations may contribute to osteopenia in patients with classic PKU. |Crujeiras et al. (2015) conducted a cross-sectional observational multicenter study that included 156 patients with hyperphenylalaninemia. Prealbumin was reduced in 34.6% of patients (74% with PKU phenotype and 94% below 18 years old), showing an adequate adherence to diet in nearly all patients (96.3%). Selenium was diminished in 25% of patients (95% with PKU phenotype), and 25-OHD in 14%. Surprisingly, folic acid levels were increased in 39% of patients, 66% with classic PKU. Phosphorus and B12 levels were diminished only in patients with low adherence to diet. |The occurrence of mental retardation in the offspring of homozygous mothers is an example of a genetic disease based on the genotype of the mother. Kerr et al. (1968) demonstrated 'fetal PKU' by administering large amounts of phenylalanine to mother monkeys. The offspring had reduced learning ability. They pointed out that the damage is aggravated by the normal placental process which functions to maintain higher levels of amino acids in the fetus than in the mother. Huntley and Stevenson (1969) and Hanley et al. (1987) reviewed the subject of PKU embryofetopathy, also known as the maternal PKU syndrome. |Huntley and Stevenson (1969) described 2 sisters with PKU who had a total of 28 pregnancies. Sixteen ended in spontaneous first-trimester abortion. The fetus in each of the 12 pregnancies carried to term had intrauterine growth retardation and microcephaly and 9 of the 12 term infants had cardiac malformations as well. |Superti-Furga et al. (1991) reported the maternal PKU syndrome in cousins, caused by mild unrecognized PKU in their mothers, who were homozygous for the arg261-to-gln mutation (612349.0006). |Usha et al. (1992) found 3 children with PKU embryofetopathy among the offspring of a Bedouin woman who was not recognized to have PKU until the birth of the third affected child. She had an apparently normal phenotype except for pigment dilution of the hair, which was more lightly colored than expected for the family and ethnic norms. She was not mentally retarded. One of the affected offspring had died of congenital heart disease at the age of 4 months. |Fisch et al. (1993) suggested that surrogate motherhood should be recommended as alternative management of PKU in women who wish to have children, i.e., in vitro fertilization using the parental gametes, followed by implantation of the pre-embryo in a surrogate mother. |Levy et al. (1996) compared MRI results of 5 children (age range: 8 months to 17 years) whose mothers had classic PKU and were not under metabolic control (plasma phenylalanine = 1,260 micromoles per liter) during at least the first 2 trimesters of pregnancy to MRI results of 2 sibs aged 9 and 11 years whose mother had classic PKU but whose plasma phenylalanine levels were generally below 360 micromoles per liter during both pregnancies. The MRI results showed a tendency for corpus callosum hypoplasia in those children whose mothers were not in metabolic control during their pregnancies. All children studied (even those with mothers in metabolic control) displayed some residual developmental/behavioral effects such as hyperactivity. |Rouse et al. (1997) reported a collaborative study of maternal PKU offspring. The cohort of offspring were examined for malformations, including congenital heart disease, craniofacial abnormalities, microcephaly, intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation, other major and minor defects, and early abnormal urologic signs. The mothers were grouped according to their mean phenylalanine levels during critical gestational weeks and average for phenylalanine exposure throughout the pregnancy. The frequency of congenital abnormalities increased with increasing maternal phenylalanine levels. Significant relationships included average phenylalanine levels at weeks 0 to 8 with congenital heart disease (P = 0.001); average phenylalanine at weeks 8 to 12 with brain, fetal, and postnatal growth retardation, wide nasal bridge, and anteverted nares; and average phenylalanine exposure during the entire pregnancy with neurologic signs. Although 14% of infants had congenital heart disease, none of the congenital heart disease occurred at the lower range of the maternal phenylalanine levels. At the lowest levels of phenylalanine, there were 3 infants (6%) with microcephaly, 2 (4%) with postnatal growth, and none with intrauterine growth retardation, in contrast to 85%, 51%, and 26%, respectively, with phenylalanine levels in the highest range. These data supported the concept that women with PKU should begin a low phenylalanine diet to achieve phenylalanine levels of less than 360 micromole/liter prior to conception and maintain this throughout the pregnancy. |Waisbren et al. (2000) studied 149 children of women with PKU and 33 children of women with mild hyperphenylalaninemia at 4 years of age. Children were stratified by the timing of maternal metabolic control at 0 to 10 weeks', 10 to 20 weeks', or after 20 weeks' gestation. Scores of a General Cognitive Index decreased as weeks to maternal metabolic control increased. Offspring of women who had metabolic control prior to pregnancy had a mean score of 99. Forty-seven percent of offspring whose mothers did not have metabolic control by 20 weeks' gestation had a General Cognitive Index score 2 standard deviations below the norm. Overall, 30% of children born to mothers with PKU had social and behavioral problems. |Rouse et al. (2000) studied a cohort of 354 women with PKU, followed up weekly with diet records, blood phenylalanine levels, and sonograms obtained at 18 to 20 and 32 weeks' gestation. At birth, 413 offspring were examined; they were followed up at 3 months, 6 months, and then annually. Bayley Mental Developmental Index and Psychomotor Developmental Index tests were given at 1 and 2 years. Congenital heart defects were found in 31 offspring; of these, 17 also had microcephaly. Mean phenylalanine levels at 4 to 8 weeks' gestation predicted congenital heart defects (P less than 0.0001). An infant with a congenital heart defect had a 3-fold risk of having microcephaly when the mother had higher phenylalanine levels. No direct relationship to the specific PAH mutation was found. None of the women whose offspring had congenital heart defects had blood phenylalanine levels in control during the first 8 weeks of gestation. Rouse et al. (2000) concluded that women with PKU need to be well controlled on a low phenylalanine diet before conception and throughout pregnancy.|Levy et al. (2001) reported on 416 offspring from 412 maternal PKU pregnancies that produced live births and compared them to 100 offspring from 99 control pregnancies. Thirty-four of the 235 offspring (14%; 95% confidence interval, 10.2 to 19.6%) from pregnancies in maternal PKU patients with a basal phenylalanine level of greater than 900 micromolar and not in metabolic control (defined as phenylalanine level less than or equal to 600 micromolar) by the eighth gestational week had congenital heart disease compared with 1 control offspring with congenital heart disease. One of the children among 50 from mothers with non-PKU mild hyperphenylalaninemia also had congenital heart disease. Coarctation of the aorta and hypoplastic left heart syndrome were overrepresented. |
171300::susceptibility to the development of isolated pheochromocytoma can be caused by germline mutation in several genes, including the TMEM127 gene (613403) on chromosome 2q11 and the MAX gene (154950) on chromosome 14q23.|Mutation in the KIF1B gene (605995) on chromosome 1p36 has been identified in 1 family. A mutation in the GDNF gene (600837) on chromosome 5p may modify susceptibility to pheochromocytoma.|Pheochromocytomas most commonly occur as part of several syndromes, and mutations in the genes that cause these syndromes have been identified in patients who manifest only pheochromocytoma. These include von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (VHL; 193300), caused by mutation in the VHL gene (608537), and multiple endocrine neoplasia types IIA (MEN2A; 171400) and IIB (MEN2B; 162300), which are caused by mutations in the RET gene (164761). Pheochromocytomas also occur with paraganglioma type 1 (PGL1; 168000), type 2 (PGL2; 601650), type 3 (PGL3; 605373), type 4 (PGL4; 115310), and type 5 (PGL5; 614165), which are caused by mutations in the SDHD (602690), SDHAF2 (613019), SDHC (602413), SDHB (185470), and SDHA (600857) genes, respectively. Pheochromocytomas have less commonly been observed in neurofibromatosis I (NF1; 162200), which is caused by mutation in the gene encoding neurofibromin-1 (613113).|In addition, somatic mutation in several of the genes involved in familial disease, including NF1, VHL, RET, and MAX, have been identified in tumor tissue from patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma (Welander et al., 2012; Burnichon et al., 2012). |For associations pending confirmation, see MOLECULAR GENETICS.|Pheochromocytomas are catecholamine-secreting tumors that usually arise within the adrenal medulla. Approximately 10% arise in extraadrenal sympathetic ganglia, and are referred to as 'paragangliomas.' Approximately 10% are malignant, and approximately 10% are hereditary (Maher and Eng, 2002; Dluhy, 2002). |Bolande (1974) introduced the concept and designation of the neurocristopathies, and identified 'simple,' including pheochromocytoma and medullary carcinoma of the thyroid, and 'complex' neurocristopathies and neurocristopathic syndromes, including NF1 and MEN2.|Knudson and Strong (1972) applied Knudson's 2-mutation theory to pheochromocytoma (see discussion in 180200) and concluded that it fits. |Maher and Eng (2002) reviewed the clinical entities and genes associated with pheochromocytoma.|Familial pheochromocytoma was first reported by Calkins and Howard (1947). |Hadorn (1963) reported a German family in which 3 sibs had adrenal tumors consistent with pheochromocytomas. A brother and sister suffered from tachycardia, sweating, hypertension, and albuminuria. The sister had advanced hypertensive retinopathy and the brother had congestive heart failure. At autopsy, the sister showed cerebral hemorrhage and bilateral adrenocortical tumors. A surviving sib developed similar symptoms. The Regitine test was strongly positive, the urine contained large amounts of norepinephrine, and pneumoperitoneum demonstrated an enlarged right adrenal which contained adrenal and paraganglion tissue. |Engelman et al. (1968) noted that familial pheochromocytoma is usually bilateral and the patients are likely to show resistance to the vasopressor effects of tyramine. |Swinton et al. (1972) reported a family in which 4 members, including a father and son, had pheochromocytomas. They pointed out that associated hypercalcemia may be due to secretion of a calcitonin-like substance; hypercalcemia could be corrected by adrenalectomy. |Kaufman and Franklin (1979) reported a family with 7 documented and other possible cases of pheochromocytoma. |Ohno et al. (1982) observed pheochromocytoma in 2 sisters whose father also had pheochromocytoma. One of the sisters had aniridia and her pheochromocytoma was malignant. |
261680::cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase deficiency (PCKDC) is caused by homozygous mutation in the PCK1 gene (614168) on chromosome 20q13.|Cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase deficiency causes a defect in gluconeogenesis that results in a 'biochemical signature' of fasting hypoglycemia with high tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediate excretion, particularly of fumarate. Other biochemical anomalies that may be seen during metabolic crisis include ketonuria, dicarboxylic aciduria, and urea cycle dysfunction (Vieira et al., 2017). See PCKDM (261650) for a discussion of mitochondrial PCK (PEPCK2; 614095) deficiency.|Sovik et al. (1975) reported a boy who developed generalized seizures on the second day of life and was found to have severe hypoglycemia. He also had frequent attacks of cyanosis and apnea. At age 8 weeks, he showed general retardation and atrophy of the optic nerve. At age 3.5 months, he underwent subtotal pancreatectomy and treatment with diazoxide to inhibit insulin production. However, poor response of the hypoglycemia to this treatment prompted the authors to consider a defect in gluconeogenesis. By studies on the patient's liver, Vidnes and Sovik (1976, 1976) demonstrated that he had a defect of gluconeogenesis due to deficiency of cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PCK1; 614168). The total activity of the enzyme was normal, but the enzyme showed an abnormal subcellular distribution, with virtually no activity detected in the cytosolic fraction of a liver homogenate. He died at age 2 years, 10 months. Postmortem examination showed severe cerebral atrophy, atrophy of the optic nerve, fatty infiltration of the liver, kidney, and heart, and hyperplasia of the pancreatic islets of Langerhans. The findings suggested that cytosolic PCK initiates gluconeogenesis at birth. |Adams et al. (2014) reported 2 sisters, born of nonconsanguineous parents of Ashkenazi Jewish ancestry, who had cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase deficiency due to mutation in the PCK1 gene. The older sister first presented at age 20 months with fasting hypoglycemia, which was associated with fever, lethargy, and ketonuria, as well as appropriately elevated growth hormone (GH1; 139250) and cortisol levels, undetectable insulin, and normal C-peptide levels. Over the subsequent 5 years, she had at least 12 similar episodes of illness- or fasting-related hypoglycemia, sometimes associated with significant lactic acidemia. Liver biopsy at age 4 years showed no iron deposits and no abnormal lipid or glycogen, although there was mild to moderate portal inflammation, mild portal fibrosis, and patchy moderate macrovesicular steatosis. The younger sister presented at age 8 months with illness-related lethargy, fasting hypoglycemia, elevated urine lactate, and ketonuria, and like her older sister, had repeated episodes of illness- or fasting-related hypoglycemia, sometimes associated with acidosis. In addition, both sisters exhibited intellectual and motor delays, as well as dysmorphic features in the older sister. In addition to mutation in PCK1, each sister carried a mutation in a different gene known to be associated with a mental retardation phenotype (see MOLECULAR GENETICS). |Santra et al. (2016) described a 4-year-old Pakistani boy, born of third-cousin parents from a multiply consanguineous family, who presented at age 9 months with encephalopathy after 3 days of persistent diarrhea and vomiting. Evaluation revealed mild hyperammonemia and acute liver failure, with massively elevated alanine (GPT; 138200) and aspartate (GOT1; 138180) transaminases, as well as coagulopathy, hypoalbuminemia, mild hypoglycemia, and hyperlactatemia. His level of consciousness rapidly normalized after administration of intravenous dextrose. Quantitative plasma amino acid analysis was suggestive of a proximal urea cycle defect, with a strongly elevated glutamine together with low citrulline and arginine. Analysis of urine organic acids during the presenting illness showed prominent tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle metabolites, especially fumarate but including succinate, malate, and alpha-ketoglutarate. Liver biopsy revealed diffuse macrosteatosis without fibrosis or inflammation, and ultrasound showed a normal-sized liver for age, but with hyperechoic parenchyma. Treatment for a proximal urea cycle defect, including dietary protein restriction, was commenced. Repeat organic and amino acid analysis a month after recovery showed no evidence of the previous abnormalities and values remained normal after return to an unrestricted diet. Growth and development were normal at age 4 years. |Tangeraas et al. (2016) provided a brief report of a previously healthy Norwegian girl who presented at age 16 months with severe gastrointestinal hemorrhage following an episode of gastroenteritis, associated with extremely high alanine and aspartate aminotransferases, slightly increased coagulation time, and slightly decreased albumin level. She subsequently experienced 2 episodes of infection-associated ketotic hypoglycemia, metabolic acidosis, and elevated lactate levels. A similar biochemical profile was confirmed during a controlled fasting test, which provoked hypoglycemia after 17 hours. Urine after a 12-hour fast showed increased excretion of 3-hydroxybutarate as well as fumaric and glutaric acids.|Vieira et al. (2017) studied a Finnish sister and brother, born of distantly consanguineous parents, and an unrelated Finnish boy, with unexplained childhood hypoglycemia. The Finnish girl required a glucose infusion during the first 24 hours of life for hypoglycemia noted due to tremor and irritability; she experienced a second episode of hypoglycemia at age 14 months after an overnight fast of about 12 hours. Blood lactate and alanine aminotransferase were slightly elevated, and ammonia was normal. Ultrasound of the liver showed increased size and echogenicity suggestive of diffuse parenchymal damage. Her younger brother had no significant health issues until age 15 months, when he was found to be hypoglycemic after a 13-hour fast, with slightly elevated alanine aminotransferase but normal ammonia. Liver ultrasound 3 months later showed size at the upper limit of normal, with normal echogenicity. The third Finnish patient, an unrelated boy, was well until 4.5 years of age, when he had a seizure in the morning and was found to be hypoglycemic. He had no signs of infection, but had been very active the night before. Lactate, pyruvate, and ammonia were normal, free fatty acids were elevated, and GPT was slightly elevated. In all 3 patients, semiquantitative urine organic acid analysis demonstrated prominent TCA cycle metabolites, particularly fumarate. All were instructed in a low-fat, high-carbohydrate diet with frequent feedings, and all showed normal growth and development, at ages 5 years, 2.5 years, and 6.8 years, respectively. Except for an illness-related episode of low glucose in the girl at age 2.75 years, there were no further episodes of hypoglycemia. |
300661::the phenotype is caused by mutations in the gene encoding phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase I (PRPS1; 311850) that result in increased enzyme activity.|X-linked recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-5 (CMTX5; 311070) is an allelic disorder resulting from decreased enzyme activity. Affected individuals have neurologic symptoms, including sensorineural deafness. Another allelic disorder, Arts syndrome (301835), results from loss of PRPS1 activity and has a severe neurologic phenotype including mental retardation, early-onset hypotonia, and susceptibility to infections.|Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase I superactivity is an X-linked inborn error of metabolism in which increased enzyme activity is associated with hyperuricemia and gout. Some affected individuals have neurodevelopmental abnormalities, particularly sensorineural deafness (Becker et al., 1988; Roessler et al., 1993). |Although different kinetic defects affecting the PRPS1 enzyme have been identified in this disorder, the common pathway involves increased synthesis of phosphoribosylpyrophosphate (PRPP), which leads to increased uric acid and purine production (Becker, 2001).|Sperling et al. (1972, 1973) and Zoref et al. (1975, 1977) described a familial disorder characterized by early-adult onset of excessive purine production, gout, and uric acid urolithiasis associated with hyperuricemia and hyperuricosuria. The PRPS1 enzyme activity was described as 'superactive,' showing increased de novo synthesis of purine nucleotides. PRPS1 activity in red cells and cultured skin fibroblasts was resistant to feedback inhibition by guanosine diphosphate (GDP) and adenosine diphosphate (ADP). Fibroblast cultures were homogeneous for the mutant enzyme in affected males, whereas unaffected females showed mutant and normal activity. The pattern of inheritance was X-linked recessive. |Becker et al. (1980) provided follow-up studies of a family reported by Nyhan et al. (1969) in which a boy had hyperuricemia, mental retardation, and sensorineural deafness from infancy associated with PRPS1 superactivity. His affected mother had gout, uric acid urolithiasis, and significant hearing loss. Fibroblast studies of this patient and his mother indicated that the mutant enzyme had both regulatory and catalytic defects. The enzyme showed 4- to 5-fold greater than normal resistance to feedback inhibition and, in addition, increased maximal velocity of the enzyme reaction. The son was hemizygous, and his mother heterozygous, for the defect. |Simmonds et al. (1982) reported a 3-year-old boy with hypotonia, locomotor delay, and high frequency hearing loss associated with purine hyperactivity. The same disorder was probably present in 2 brothers who died in early childhood. The mother also showed hyperuricemia, purine overproduction, and sensorineural deafness from infancy. Severe depletion of red cell nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and GTP appeared to be associated with the neurologic abnormalities. Simmonds et al. (1982) referred to the report of Rosenberg et al. (1970) in which 5 family members had ataxia, deafness, hyperuricemia, and renal insufficiency. Serum urate levels were elevated in other members of the kindred who did not have renal insufficiency, indicating that the hyperuricemia was not secondary to renal disease. Red cell hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT1; 308000) levels were normal. The pedigree was consistent with X-linked inheritance with full expression in some females and incomplete expression in others. Riccardi (1974) studied the same family and concluded that X-linked dominant inheritance was unlikely because males seemed to be no more severely affected on the average than females. |Becker et al. (1988) reported a Spanish mother and son with PRPS1 superactivity. The 8-year-old boy had tophaceous gout, purine nucleotide and uric acid overproduction, and sensorineural deafness; his 27-year-old mother had gout. Fibroblast studies showed that the kinetic basis of superactivity in this family was resistance to purine nucleotide inhibition of enzyme activity. The boy was hemizygous, and his mother heterozygous, for the defect. |Christen et al. (1992) described a family with hyperuricemia and aberrant PRPS activity affecting the mother and 2 sons. Hypertonia and hyperuricemia were recognized in the mother at the age of 20 years; she later developed gouty arthritis. Her 2 sons were born prematurely by cesarean section. Gestational diabetes mellitus was diagnosed during the pregnancy with the first affected son, and both sons were diagnosed as having neonatal diabetes mellitus requiring insulin treatment through early childhood. Both boys showed growth retardation, mental and motor retardation with absent development of speech, muscular hypotonia (especially during the first year of life), cerebellar ataxia, and dysmetria, polyneuropathy with areflexia, and atrophy of the lower legs. All 3 had facial stigmata suggestive of a genetic syndrome, including triangular face with prominent forehead, epicanthus, hypotelorism, beaked nose, broad mouth, and hyperopia. Electroneurography in both boys demonstrated a progressive axonal neuropathy with demyelinization. Hearing was not impaired in any of the three. Crystals of urate could be seen in the diapers and on the tip of the penis in both boys, but both had normal renal function. Findings in fibroblasts and lymphoblasts of both boys suggested superactivity of PRPS due to resistance of the enzyme to nucleotide feedback. |Moran et al. (2012) described a patient with PRPS1 superactivity as well as features of Arts syndrome (301835), a developmental disorder also caused by mutations in the PRPS1 gene. Laboratory studies showed increased serum uric acid and increased urinary hypoxanthine consistent with PRPS1 superactivity, but he did not have gout. He had developmental delay, hypotonia, areflexia, motor neuropathy, sensorineural hearing loss, and a Chiari I malformation. In addition, he had recurrent infections and early death at age 27 months from infection, consistent with Arts syndrome. A maternal uncle with similar symptoms had died of pneumonia at age 2. |
610992::phosphoserine aminotransferase deficiency (PSATD) is caused by compound heterozygous mutation in the PSAT1 gene (610936) on chromosome 9q21. One such family has been reported.|Deficiency of phosphoserine aminotransferase (PSAT) is characterized biochemically by low plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations of serine and glycine and clinically by intractable seizures, acquired microcephaly, hypertonia, and psychomotor retardation. Outcome is poor once the individual becomes symptomatic, but treatment with serine and glycine supplementation from birth can lead to a normal outcome (Hart et al., 2007). |Hart et al. (2007) identified PSAT deficiency in a brother and sister, the children of nonconsanguineous British parents, who showed low concentrations of serine and glycine in plasma and CSF. The index patient was healthy at birth, with head circumference and weight in the 9th percentile. At age 2 weeks he was admitted to the hospital with poor feeding and cyanotic episodes. At age 7 weeks he was experiencing jerking movements and posturing. At age 9 weeks he presented with severe, intractable seizures and slight hypertonia. His head circumference was less than the 0.4th percentile, whereas weight was in the 2nd percentile. His seizures could not be controlled despite multiple-anticonvulsant therapy. Extensive biochemical investigations revealed no abnormalities with the exception of low plasma and CSF concentrations of serine and glycine. Cranial imaging showed generalized atrophy, a hypoplastic cerebellar vermis, and poor white matter development. Treatment with serine begun at 11 weeks of age normalized plasma and CSF concentrations, but the clinical effect was limited. Severe seizure episodes continued, hypertonia worsened, and the patient died at age 7 months. In the proband's younger sister plasma and CSF samples in the neonatal period revealed low concentrations of serine and glycine, and supplementation with serine and glycine was begun in the first 24 hours of life. Her growth and development were normal at 3 years of age, with the exception of an apneic episode at age 2 weeks. Analysis of fibroblasts from the proband revealed phosphoserine aminotransferase activity that was low in comparison to that in controls (approximately 50% decreased), but not sufficiently so to conclude the presence of a deficiency disorder. Hart et al. (2007) also noted that plasma serine and glycine concentrations were only marginally below the reference range in the proband, emphasizing the importance of measuring serine and glycine in CSF as well as plasma. |
614023::phosphoserine phosphatase deficiency (PSPHD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the PSPH gene (172480) on chromosome 7p11.|Jaeken et al. (1997) described a Belgian patient with phosphoserine phosphatase deficiency. The affected boy had pre- and postnatal growth retardation, moderate psychomotor retardation, and facial features suggestive of Williams syndrome (194050). Phosphoserine phosphatase activity in lymphoblasts and fibroblasts was reduced to 25% of normal values. Treatment with oral serine led to normalization of serine levels and some improvement in head growth (Jaeken et al., 1997). |Vincent et al. (2015) reported a large highly consanguineous Pakistani family in which 7 individuals had delayed development from infancy and moderate to profound intellectual disability. All developed tonic-clonic or petit mal seizures at some point in childhood, and all had hypertonia resulting in motor difficulties. One patient had microcephaly and 1 had brain atrophy apparent on MRI. Plasma serine and glycine levels were decreased in 2 patients tested. |
613038::combined pituitary hormone deficiency-1 (CPHD1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the POU1F1 gene (173110) on chromosome 3p11.|Combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) in man denotes impaired production of growth hormone (GH; 139250) and one or more of the other 5 anterior pituitary hormones. Mutations of the POU1F1 gene in the human and Pit1 in the mouse are responsible for pleiotropic deficiencies of GH, prolactin (PRL; 176760), and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH; see 188540), while the production of adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH; see 176830), luteinizing hormone (LH; 152780), and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH; 136530) are preserved (Wu et al., 1998). In infancy severe growth deficiency from birth as well as distinctive facial features with prominent forehead, marked midfacial hypoplasia with depressed nasal bridge, deep-set eyes, and a short nose with anteverted nostrils and hypoplastic pituitary gland by MRI examination can be seen (Aarskog et al., 1997). Some cases present with severe mental retardation along with short stature (Radovick et al., 1992). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Combined Pituitary Hormone Deficiency,CPHD2 (262600), associated with hypogonadism, is caused by mutation in the PROP1 gene (601538). CPHD3 (221750), which is associated with rigid cervical spine and variable sensorineural deafness, is caused by mutation in the LHX3 gene (600577). CPHD4 (262700) is caused by mutation in the LHX4 gene (602146). CPHD5 (see septooptic dysplasia, 182230) is caused by mutation in the HESX1 gene (601802). CPHD6 (613986) is caused by mutation in the OTX2 gene (600037).|Wit et al. (1989) described 2 unrelated Dutch families in which 4 of 10 children presented with total pituitary growth hormone (GH; 139250) and prolactin (PRL; 176760) deficiency and a partial thyrotropin (TSH; see 188540) deficiency. The GH gene was intact in 'family I.' The pituitaries were normal by MRI. All children responded well to GH and L-thyroxine therapy. Baseline plasma somatostatin and its peak response to arginine infusion were elevated in the 2 affected sibs in 'family I,' and they had a milder TSH deficiency than the 2 affected sibs in 'family II;' plasma insulin showed a poor response to arginine infusion. Wit et al. (1989) suggested that this hereditary combination of pituitary deficiencies was due to deficiency of a common positive transcription factor. |Tatsumi et al. (1992) reported 2 sisters, born of consanguineous parents, who had cretinism due to deficiency of thyrotropin, growth hormone, and prolactin. Both patients showed typical clinical features of cretinism, such as puffy face and saddle nose, hoarse voice, and myxedema. The younger sister died of aspiration pneumonia 2 months after birth. The parents and 5 brothers were unaffected. |Radovick et al. (1992) studied a patient with a deficiency of GH, PRL, and TSH, previously reported by Rogol and Kahn (1976), who had severe mental retardation and short stature. The patient's mother was of normal stature and had normal pituitary hormone levels; other family members were unavailable for study. |Okamoto et al. (1994) described a Japanese girl who had prolonged neonatal jaundice, severely retarded postnatal growth, and protruding forehead with retracted nasal bridge. Hormone evaluation revealed complete deficiency of PRL and GH, with decreased TSH. Her serum cortisol level was normal and she had no symptoms associated with adrenal insufficiency. The anterior pituitary was normal in size by MRI. An older brother, who also had severe neonatal jaundice, died of hypoplastic left heart syndrome at 10 days of age; no endocrinologic evaluation or postmortem examination was done. There was also an unaffected older sister. |De Zegher et al. (1995) reported a mother-infant pair with CPHD. Growth failure was noted in the mother from early infancy, and she was more than 7 standard deviations below the normal mean at 7 years of age; pulmonary valve stenosis was also noted. She was hypothyroid with a good response to thyroid therapy, and initiation of GH therapy was followed by catch-up growth. Spontaneous puberty occurred at age 15 years and menarche at 17 years. Low prolactin levels were found. A final height of 149.5 cm (-2.1 SD) was reached at age 19 years; 7 molars had not developed. MRI showed hypoplasia of the anterior pituitary; the pituitary stalk and the intrasellar neurohypophysis were normal. She became pregnant at age 29 years; ultrasound examinations after 33 weeks showed fetal femoral growth retardation and polyhydramnios was present in increasing amounts after 35 weeks. The fetus was delivered by cesarean section at 38 weeks. Preoperatively the mother was found to be severely hypothyroid; prolactin concentrations were undetectable in the mother's serum after delivery and lactogenesis failed. At birth, the infant girl was hypotonic with a widely open sagittal suture, depressed nasal bridge, enlarged tongue, and scalp and thoracic edema as well as ascites. Correction of severe neonatal hypotension necessitated prolonged administration of dopamine and/or dobutamine; the ductus arteriosus failed to close despite cyclooxygenase inhibitor therapy, and was surgically transected on day 10. Despite thyroid replacement therapy and recombinant human GH administration, neurologic development of the infant was impaired. At 1 year of age, the infant had a normal size but was hypotonic, had severe strabismus, and presented a 'chaotic behavior,' with short attention span and poor visual and auditory contact.|Pellegrini-Bouiller et al. (1996) studied 4 sibs with CPHD, born of consanguineous unaffected parents, who had complete GH deficiency diagnosed in early childhood and later developed hypothyroidism and were found to have undetectable PRL levels. MRI in 1 of the sibs showed a hypoplastic pituitary. |Voss and Rosenfeld (1992) reviewed the development and differentiation of the 5 pituitary cell types: galactotropes, gonadotropes, corticotropes, thyrotropes, and somatotropes. As indicated by the mutations in PIT1 described later, combined pituitary hormone deficiency can have either autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive inheritance, depending on the part of the PIT1 molecule affected by the mutation. Some mutations have a dominant-negative effect. |
184700::Stein and Leventhal (1935) demonstrated that obesity, hirsutism, and amenorrhea are clinical correlates of enlarged polycystic ovaries. Thereafter, the criteria were established as bilateral enlarged ovaries, normal 24-hour urinary ketosteroids, and lack of virilization. Response to ovarian wedge resection was included as a criterion by some. The fathers tend to be abnormally hairy, female sibs are hirsute, and mothers and sisters often have oligomenorrhea. Culdoscopy has often shown signs of Stein-Leventhal syndrome, e.g., 8 of 12 sisters of cases showed ovarian changes consistent with that diagnosis (Cooper et al., 1968). Urinary steroid determinations also suggest a genetic basis.|Ovarian hyperthecosis was the term used by Givens et al. (1971), who found 41 women (in 2 kindreds) who had hirsutism and/or oligomenorrhea. Ovarian histology performed in 8 showed hyperplasia of theca cells in atretic follicles, a paucity of primordial and developing follicles, and stromal hyperplasia. Elevated levels of androstanedione and/or testosterone and of luteinizing hormone were found. Estradiol and follicle-stimulating hormone levels were low. These levels tended to return to normal after bilateral wedge resection of the ovaries. Some men of the families had low plasma testosterone and had abnormally high LH-FSH ratio as in the women. The pedigrees were consistent with dominant inheritance, probably autosomal because in 1 kindred the disorder was apparently transmitted through a father and son.|Mandel et al. (1983) studied 4 families, each with 2 affected sisters; in 1 family, the mother and a maternal aunt were likewise affected. The diagnosis of PCO was confirmed by increased serum testosterone, androstenedione, and LH levels compared to those in normal women. Elevated concentrations of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate indicated excess adrenal androgen secretion. |Kuttenn et al. (1985) concluded that their 24 hirsute women with late-onset adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (201910) were indistinguishable from those with idiopathic hirsutism or Stein-Leventhal syndrome. Chrousos et al. (1982) made the same observation. Stein-Leventhal syndrome is probably heterogeneous; see 264300 for information that some patients may have deficiency of estradiol 17-beta-dehydrogenase. It appears that 'idiopathic hirsutism,' which at times is familial, is sometimes due to increased skin sensitivity to androgen and occurs in the absence of elevated plasma androgens (Kuttenn et al., 1977). On the basis of a large family study, Hague et al. (1986) arrived at an hypothesis of dominant inheritance with meiotic drive accounting for the anomalous segregation. They found PCO in 96% of daughters of affected females and in 82% of daughters of carrier males. |Lunde et al. (1989) reported that 19.7% of male first-degree relatives of PCO patients had early baldness or excessive hairiness, as opposed to 6.5% of relatives of controls. For female first-degree relatives, the percentages for PCO-related symptoms were 31.4 and 3.2, respectively. In a subgroup of 52 families of PCO patients in which 1 of the parents was reported to have symptoms, 35% of brothers and 58% of sisters had symptoms. The findings were considered consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance for a 'sizeable fraction of families.' The possibility of X-linked dominant inheritance was eliminated. |Franks et al. (1997) favored an oligogenic basis (over autosomal dominant inheritance) for polycystic ovary syndrome. They stated that it is the most common endocrinopathy in women of reproductive age. |In preliminary family studies, Legro et al. (1998) found that some female first-degree relatives of women with PCO syndrome have hyperandrogenemia. They hypothesized that this may be a genetic trait suitable for linkage analysis. They examined 115 sisters of 80 probands with PCO syndrome from unrelated families. PCO syndrome was diagnosed by the combination of elevated serum androgen levels and 6 or fewer menses per year with the exclusion of secondary causes. The diagnostic criteria for PCO syndrome were fulfilled in 22% of the sisters. In addition, 24% of the sisters had hyperandrogenemia and regular menstrual cycles. Probands, sisters with PCO syndrome, and hyperandrogenemic sisters had elevated serum luteinizing hormone levels compared with control women. The familial aggregation of hyperandrogenemia in PCO syndrome kindreds suggested that it is a genetic trait which can be used to assign affected status in linkage studies designed to identify PCO syndrome genes. |Polycystic ovary syndrome is associated with an increased risk of type II diabetes mellitus. Defects in both insulin action and insulin secretion contribute to this predisposition to diabetes. Colilla et al. (2001) used the frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance test to quantitate insulin secretion, insulin action, and their product among 33 women with PCOS and 48 nondiabetic first-degree relatives. They then quantitated the heritability of these measures from familial correlations estimated within a genetic model. The sib correlation for insulin secretion was highly significant. In addition, the parameter quantitating insulin secretion in relation to insulin sensitivity was significant among sibs. The authors concluded that there is a heritable component to beta-cell dysfunction in families of women with PCOS, and that heritability of beta-cell dysfunction is likely to be a significant factor in the predisposition to diabetes in PCOS. |Ehrmann et al. (2005) examined the effects of race and family history of type II diabetes on the risk of impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and type II diabetes in a large cohort of women with PCOS. They found that a family history of type II diabetes in a first-degree relative was associated with an increased risk of metabolic abnormality, IGT, and type II diabetes in women with PCOS. They also observed higher insulin levels and greater insulin resistance in black women with PCOS than in white women with PCOS; these differences remained statistically significant even after taking the family history of diabetes into account. |The menstrual disturbances, androgen excess, and obesity that characterize PCOS suggest that women with PCOS may be at increased risk for obstructive sleep apnea. Fogel et al. (2001) observed by overnight polysomnography that women with PCOS had a higher apnea-hypopnea index than controls. The authors concluded that women with PCOS were more likely to suffer from symptomatic obstructive sleep apnea syndrome. Furthermore, apnea-hypopnea index correlated with waist-hip ratio, serum testosterone, and unbound testosterone in women with PCOS. |Bonini et al. (2007) performed a complete eye examination on 20 of 62 consecutive patients with PCO with or without hyperandrogenism who had a history of ocular symptoms. Women with PCOS were more likely to have itchy-dry eyes, decreased tear break-up time, and increased conjunctival goblet cell density compared with both PCO patients and healthy subjects. |Sir-Petermann et al. (2007) studied adiponectin serum concentrations and metabolic parameters in prepubertal and pubertal daughters of women with PCOS to identify girls with increased metabolic risk. Fifty-three prepubertal and 22 pubertal daughters of PCOS women and 32 prepubertal and 17 pubertal daughters of control women were studied. Both groups had similar chronological ages, body mass index SD score, and Tanner stage distribution. In the prepubertal girls, 2-hour insulin was higher and adiponectin levels were lower in the PCOS daughter group compared with the control daughter group. In the pubertal girls, triglycerides, 2-hour insulin, and serum testosterone concentrations were higher, and SHBG (182205) lower, in PCOS daughters compared with control daughters, but adiponectin (605441) levels were similar in both groups. Sir-Petermann et al. (2007) concluded that some of the metabolic features of PCOS are present in daughters of PCOS women before the onset of hyperandrogenism. Adiponectin appears to be one of the early markers of metabolic derangement in these girls. |Polycystic Ovary Syndrome Associated with Male Pattern Baldness|Carey et al. (1993) described an autosomal dominant syndrome of polycystic ovaries and premature male pattern baldness (109200). Carey et al. (1994) demonstrated an association with a change in the 5-prime promoter region of the CYP17 gene (609300), which modified the expression of the syndrome in some families but did not appear to be the primary genetic defect. |Govind et al. (1999) screened first-degree relatives of women affected by PCO to obtain evidence for the genetic basis of polycystic ovaries and premature male pattern baldness (PMPB). Of the relatives of 29 PCO probands, 15 of 29 (52%) mothers, 6 of 28 (21%) fathers, 35 of 53 (66%) sisters, and 4 of 18 (22%) brothers were assigned affected status. First-degree female and male relatives of affected individuals had a 61% and 22% chance of being affected, respectively. Of all sibs of PCO probands, 39 of 71 were affected, giving a segregation ratio of 39/32 (55%), which is consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance for PCO/PMPB. Thus the inheritance of PCO and PMPB is consistent with an autosomal dominant mode in PCO families. Sisters of PCO probands with polycystic ovarian morphology were more likely to have menstrual irregularity and had larger ovaries and higher serum androstenedione and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate levels than sisters without PCO, suggesting a spectrum of clinical phenotypes in PCO families. Men with PMPB had higher serum testosterone than those without. The authors concluded that these data are consistent with a role for genetic differences in androgen synthesis, metabolism, or action in the pathogenesis of PCO. |
176100::porphyria cutanea tarda type II, or familial PCT, is caused by heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (UROD; 613521). Hepatoerythropoietic porphyria (HEP) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the UROD gene.|Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) is characterized by light-sensitive dermatitis and the excretion of large amounts of uroporphyrin in urine (Elder et al., 1980). |De Verneuil et al. (1978) and others classified porphyria cutanea tarda, the most common type of porphyria, into 2 types: type I (176090), or 'sporadic' type, associated with approximately 50% level of uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (UROD) in liver (Elder et al., 1978; Felsher et al., 1982), and type II, or 'familial' type, characterized by 50% deficient activity of the same enzyme in many tissues (Kushner et al., 1976; Elder et al., 1980). |PCT type II is an autosomal dominant disorder with low penetrance and constitutes about 20% of cases of PCT. Recognized exacerbating factors of PCT include iron overload, excessive use of alcohol, exposure to polyhalogenated aromatic chemicals, exposure to estrogens, chronic viral hepatitis C, HIV infections, and mutation in the HFE gene (613609) that are responsible for hereditary hemochromatosis (235200) (review by Lambrecht et al., 2007). |Onset of light-sensitive dermatitis in later adult life, associated with the excretion of large amounts of uroporphyrin in urine, characterizes porphyria cutanea tarda, which was so named by Waldenstrom (1937). On areas of skin exposed to sunlight, especially the face, ears, and backs of the hands, chronic ulcerating lesions commence as blisters, and the skin may also be mechanically fragile (Grossman et al., 1979). Hyperpigmentation and hypertrichosis also occur. Acute neuropathic episodes do not occur in this form of porphyria. Onset is often associated with alcoholism, and occasionally with exposure to other agents, such as estrogens. Iron overload is frequently present, and may be associated, coincidentally or causally, with varying degrees of liver damage or fibrosis; liver histology may be characteristic (Cortes et al., 1980). On biopsy, liver parenchyma cells are also loaded with porphyrins and fluoresce bright red in ultraviolet light. The skin lesions are distinctly related to circulating porphyrins (Holti et al., 1958). |Malina and Lim (1988) described a 29-year-old woman who first presented with blisters and erosions on the dorsum of the fingers and hands bilaterally 3 weeks after delivery of her second child. The diagnosis of PCT was established enzymatically and by porphyrin studies. Reduced red cell UROD activity was found also in the newborn child and in the patient's mother. |Classic congenital erythropoietic porphyria (263700) is due to deficiency of uroporphyrinogen III cosynthase. Kushner et al. (1982) described a remarkable 51-year-old man with congenital erythropoietic porphyria (Gunther disease), first manifested in infancy with eventual development of mutilating skin photosensitivity. The morphologic features of dyserythropoietic bone marrow cells, studied by light and electron microscopy, were identical to those found in congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type I (224120); such had been described before in Gunther disease. A red-orange nuclear fluorescence is not seen in type I dyserythropoietic anemia. The patient of Kushner et al. (1982) showed massive porphyrinuria, but the pattern of porphyrin excretion was atypical for classic Gunther disease: hepta-carboxyl (7-COOH) porphyrin was the major urine porphyrin, much uroporphyrin was present, and both were predominantly of the isomer III type. Erythrocyte uroporphyrinogen III cosynthase activity was normal, but uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase activity was 50% of normal. Two sons showed equally subnormal uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase activity. It was the opinion of the authors that their 51-year-old patient had 2 genetic diseases--uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase deficiency (a heterozygous state) and type I congenital dyserythropoietic anemia (a presumably homozygous state). With coexisting hepatic siderosis, heterozygous uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase deficiency leads to porphyria cutanea tarda. Homozygosity for a deficiency gene leads to hepatoerythropoietic porphyria. Thus, Gunther disease can have more than one cause. Two other reported patients with clinically typical congenital erythropoietic porphyria, but with a pattern of urinary porphyrin excretion similar to porphyria cutanea tarda, were referenced by Kushner et al. (1982). |Hepatoerythropoietic Porphyria|Hepatoerythropoietic porphyria (HEP) is a severe, autosomal recessive form of cutaneous porphyria that presents in infancy and is characterized biochemically by excessive excretion of acetate-substituted porphyrins and accumulation of protoporphyrin in erythrocytes (Hofstad et al., 1973; Simon et al., 1977; Czarnecki, 1980). As in porphyria cutanea tarda, uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase is deficient. However, the enzyme level is very low (7-8%) in erythrocytes and cultured skin fibroblasts, leading Elder et al. (1981) to propose that HEP is the homozygous state for porphyria cutanea tarda. |De Verneuil et al. (1984) brought to 9 the number of known cases of HEP and confirmed that these patients are homozygous for mutations in the same gene that causes PCT. The patients of de Verneuil et al. (1984) were twin daughters of a Tunisian couple related as second cousins. Both parents, although asymptomatic, showed intermediate levels of enzymatic and immunoreactive URO decarboxylase. The twins were CRM-negative, in contrast to previously reported homozygous patients. |Toback et al. (1987) described a man with relatively mild hepatoerythropoietic porphyria and concluded that the man was a homozygote since both of his parents and his 3 children, all of whom were asymptomatic, showed moderate deficiency of UROD. They concluded that the relative mildness of the clinical symptoms in the proband was probably related to the level of residual enzyme activity and that the genetic defect in UROD in this disorder can be heterogeneous. |Fujimoto and Brazil (1992) reported a 23-year-old woman thought to represent the 18th instance of HEP reported worldwide. She had photosensitive skin of early onset, hypertrichosis, and severe scleroderma-like lesions of the hands. |A syndrome similar to PCT, a 'phenocopy,' is caused by toxic exposure to certain organic chemicals such as hexachlorobenzene, as in the epidemic caused by contaminated seed wheat in Turkey (Cam and Nigogosyan, 1963; Dean, 1972) and by occupational exposure to chlorinated hydrocarbons (Bleiberg et al., 1964). |
176270::Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is in effect a contiguous gene syndrome resulting from deletion of the paternal copies of the imprinted SNRPN gene (182279), the NDN gene (602117), and possibly other genes within the chromosome region 15q11-q13.|Prader-Willi syndrome is characterized by diminished fetal activity, obesity, muscular hypotonia, mental retardation, short stature, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and small hands and feet. It can be considered to be an autosomal dominant disorder and is caused by deletion or disruption of a gene or several genes on the proximal long arm of the paternal chromosome 15 or maternal uniparental disomy 15, because the gene(s) on the maternal chromosome(s) 15 are virtually inactive through imprinting. Horsthemke and Wagstaff (2008) provided a detailed review of the mechanisms of imprinting of the Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome (105830) region. |See also the chromosome 15q11-q13 duplication syndrome (608636), which shows overlapping clinical features.|Feeding difficulties generally improve by the age of 6 months. From 12 to 18 months onward, uncontrollable hyperphagia causes major somatic as well as psychologic problems. Diminished growth is observed in the majority of infants (Butler and Meaney, 1987). Small hands with delicate and tapering fingers and small feet (acromicria) are seen in most infants and adolescents; hand and foot sizes correlate well with length, but not with age, and foot size tends to be lower than hand size. However, patients of normal height tend to have normally sized hands (Hudgins and Cassidy, 1991). The face is characterized by a narrow bifrontal diameter, almond-shaped eyes (often in mild upslanted position), strabismus, full cheeks, and diminished mimic activity due to muscular hypotonia. Plethoric obesity becomes the most striking feature. From the age of about 6 years onward, many children present scars from scratching due to itching, and later, almost all show abdominal striae. |Depigmentation relative to the familial background is a feature in about three-quarters of the patients. Butler (1989), Hittner et al. (1982), and several authors remarked that this sign is confined to cases with deletions and absent in those with maternal disomy 15. Phelan et al. (1988) presented a black female child with oculocutaneous albinism, PWS, and an interstitial deletion of 15q11.2. Patients with classic albinism (203100) have misrouting of optic fibers, with fibers from 20 degrees or more of the temporal retina crossing at the chiasm instead of projecting to the ipsilateral hemisphere. Misrouting can result in strabismus and nystagmus. Because patients with PWS have hypopigmentation and strabismus, Creel et al. (1986) studied 6 patients, selected for a history of strabismus, with pattern-onset visual evoked potentials on binocular and monocular stimulation. Of the 4 with hypopigmentation, 3 had abnormal evoked potentials indistinguishable from those recorded in albinos. The 2 with normal pigmentation had normal responses. Wiesner et al. (1987) found that 14 of 29 patients with PWS had ocular hypopigmentation. There was possible correlation between hypopigmentation and a deletion of 15q. |A frequent feature generally overlooked is thick saliva at the edges of the mouth. Patients tend to be relatively insensitive to pain (including that caused by obtaining blood samples)(Prader, 1991).|Eiholzer et al. (1999) presented data on body composition and leptin (164160) levels of 13 young, still underweight children and 10 older overweight children with Prader-Willi syndrome. Both groups showed elevated skinfold standard deviation scores for body mass index and elevated body mass index-adjusted leptin levels, suggesting relatively increased body fat even in underweight children. Leptin production appeared to be intact. The authors concluded that body composition in PWS is already disturbed in infancy, long before the development of obesity. |Van Mil et al. (2001) compared body composition in 17 patients with PWS with 17 obese control patients matched for gender and bone age. In children with PWS, adiposity was associated with reduced fat-free mass, and extracellular-to-intracellular water ratio was increased. Both findings are related to growth hormone (GH; 139250) function and physical activity. Bone mineral density, especially in the limbs, tends to be reduced in patients with PWS and is related to growth hormone function. |Gunay-Aygun et al. (2001) reviewed the sensitivity of PWS diagnostic criteria and proposed revised criteria for DNA testing. From birth to 2 years any infant with hypotonia and poor suck should have DNA testing for the PWS deletion. From age 2 to 6 years any child with hypotonia and a history of poor suck and global developmental delay should have DNA testing. From 6 years to 12 years any child with history of hypotonia and poor suck, global developmental delay, and excessive eating with central obesity should be tested for PWS. |Greenswag (1987) reported on a survey of 232 adults with PWS, ranging in age from 16 to 64 years. Of 106 patients whose chromosomes were analyzed, 54 had an abnormality of chromosome 15, primarily a deletion. Physical characteristics, health problems, intelligence, psychosocial adjustment, and impact on the family were reviewed. Emotional lability, poor gross motor skills, cognitive impairment, and insatiable hunger were especially remarkable features. |Olander et al. (2000) pointed to the occurrence of 3 PWS phenotypes: patients with paternal deletions have the typical PWS phenotype; patients with maternal UPD have a slightly milder phenotype with better cognitive function; and patients with maternal UPD and mosaic trisomy 15 have the most severe phenotype with a high incidence of congenital heart disease. They described a patient with the severe phenotype with maternal isodisomy rather than the more common maternal heterodisomy. They concluded that the more severe PWS phenotype was due to trisomy 15 mosaicism rather than to homozygosity for deleterious chromosome 15 genes. |In contrast to infants, adults invariably are small compared to their family members (Butler and Meaney, 1987). Due to high caloric intake, alimentary diabetes frequently sets in during or soon after the period of puberty. Puberty itself is diminished in PWS patients of both sexes. Adolescents and young adults often require digitalization because of cardiac insufficiency; however, it has been shown that substantial weight reduction relieves the need of cardiac therapy. Any attempt to reduce food intake in these adolescents often leads to serious psychologic and behavioral problems, and in some children, the situation in their home environment becomes intolerable (Curfs et al., 1991). Patients rarely survive beyond 25 to 30 years of age, the cause of death being diabetes and cardiac failure. However, if strict weight control is achieved, both diabetes and cardiac failure are greatly reduced and survival is either not or only mildly reduced. Johnsen et al. (1967) studied 7 mentally retarded patients, aged 4 to 19 years. Studies showed that fat synthesis from acetate during fasting was 10 times greater in patients than in unaffected sibs, and that hormone-stimulated lipolysis was depressed. These workers suggested that the condition is comparable to the genetic obese-hyperglycemic mouse. Since during fasting substrate continues to be used for new fat and lipolysis is deficient, survival depends on a continuous supply of exogenous calories. The abundant fat, muscle hypotonia, and small feet and hands are exactly the opposite of the sparse fat, muscle hypertrophy, and large hands and feet in Seip syndrome (269700). |Hoybye et al. (2002) studied the clinical, genetic, endocrinologic, and metabolic findings in 10 male and 9 female adult PWS patients (mean age, 25 years). The PWS karyotype was demonstrated in 13 patients. The mean BMI was 35.6 kg/m2, and total body fat was increased. Two-thirds were biochemically hypogonadal. Fifty percent had severe GH deficiency. Four were hypertensive. One patient had heart failure and diabetes. Impaired glucose tolerance was seen in 4 patients, elevated homeostasis model assessment index in 9, and modest dyslipidemia in 7. IGF-binding protein-1 (146730) correlated negatively with insulin (176730) levels. Four patients had osteoporosis, and 11 had osteopenia. There was no significant difference between the group with the PWS karyotype and the group without the karyotype in age, BMI, waist-to-hip ratio, percent body fat, insulin values, homeostasis model assessment index, or lipid profile, except for lipoprotein(a) (152200), which was significantly higher in the group with the negative karyotype. Hoybye et al. (2002) concluded that the risk factors found predicting cardiovascular disease were secondary to GHD and emphasized the importance of evaluating treatment of GHD in adults with PWS. |Curfs et al. (1991) concluded that PWS patients score better on visual motor discrimination skills than on auditory verbal processing skills. |Lindgren et al. (2000) studied the microstructure of eating behavior in patients with PWS and compared it with that of members of obese and normal weight control groups of the same age. PWS patients had a mean age of 10 +/- 4 years, while the control groups were 12 +/- 3 years (normal weight) and 12 +/- 4 years (obese). Subjects with PWS had a longer duration of eating rate compared with members of both obese and normal weight groups. In subjects with PWS, 56% of the eating curves were non-decelerating, compared with 10% of the normal weight group and 30% of the obese group. Lindgren et al. (2000) concluded that the eating behavior found in subjects with PWS might be due to decreased satiation rather than increased hunger. |Gunay-Aygun et al. (2001) proposed new revised criteria for DNA testing for individuals in adolescence and adulthood. Anyone with cognitive impairment (usually mild mental retardation), excessive eating with central obesity, and hypothalamic hypogonadism, and/or typical behaviors, including temper tantrums and obsessive-compulsive features, should be referred for DNA testing for PWS. |Among 25 patients with PWS aged 18 years or older, Boer et al. (2002) found that 7 (28%) had severe affective disorder with psychotic features, with a mean age of onset of 26 years. The 7 affected persons, all aged 28 years or older, included all 5 with disomies of chromosome 15, 1 with a deletion in this chromosome, and 1 with an imprinting center mutation in the same chromosome. They postulated that in PWS, an abnormal pattern of expression of a sex-specific imprinted gene on chromosome 15 is associated with psychotic illness in early adult life. |Vogels et al. (2004) detailed the psychopathologic manifestations of 6 adults with PWS and a history of psychotic episodes. Characteristics of the psychotic disorder included early and acute onset, polymorphous and shifting symptoms, psychiatric hospitalization along with precipitating stress factors, and a prodromal phase of physiologic symptoms. |To evaluate the risk of cancer in patients with PWS, Davies et al. (2003) conducted a retrospective questionnaire survey of its occurrence among patients registered with the PWS Association compared with cases in the general US population based on the SEER program. The median age of 1,024 PWS patients was 19.0 years (range, 0.1-63 years) with 2 older than age 50. The ratio of observed (8) to expected (4.8) cancers was 1.67 (p = 0.1610; 95% CI = 0.72-3.28). Three myeloid leukemias were confirmed, resulting in a ratio of observed to expected of 40.18 (p = 0.0001; 95% CI = 8.0-117). The authors speculated that a gene within the 15q11-q13 region may be involved in the biology of myeloid leukemia or that secondary manifestations of PWS, such as obesity, may be associated with an increased risk of certain cancers. |Wey et al. (2005) described a woman with features consistent with PWS due to a mosaic imprinting defect. Three independent assays revealed a reduced proportion of nonmethylated SNURF-SNRPN alleles in peripheral blood DNA. Microsatellite analysis and FISH revealed apparently normal chromosomes 15 of biparental origin. Wey et al. (2005) estimated that approximately 50% of the patient's blood cells had an imprinting defect. Apart from a rather normal facial appearance, the proband had typical features of PWS in terms of truncal obesity, small hands with tapered fingers, and small feet. Operation for strabismus had been performed. When evaluated at 21 years of age, she presented with the major signs of PWS, except for the relatively normal facial appearance. Wey et al. (2005) suggested that the patient, although presenting with atypical PWS features at birth and in infancy, had progressively acquired more pronounced PWS features during childhood and adolescence. |Sinnema et al. (2012) reported the clinical features of 12 patients over the age of 50 years with genetically confirmed PWS. Eleven patients lived in a facility, and 1 lived with his elderly mother. Half of the patients had diabetes mellitus with an average age at diagnosis of 41.6 years. Three patients had hypertension, 3 had a history of stroke, 6 had a history of fractures, 10 had foot problems, 5 had scoliosis, 9 had edema, and 6 had erysipelas. Older patients had significantly lower functioning, particularly in activities of daily living, compared to younger control patients, and the decline began around age 40. All 8 patients with maternal uniparental disomy used psychotropic medications, 7 of whom had a psychiatric disorder. None of the 4 patients with a paternal deletion had a psychiatric illness. Sinnema et al. (2012) suggested that age-associated medical problems may be exacerbated by temperature instability, decreased mobility, and high pain threshold in PWS. Overall, the constellation of features suggested premature aging in PWS, which may also result from abnormalities in sex hormone levels. Sinnema et al. (2012) noted that the life expectancy of individuals with PWS had increased in recent years, and that these individuals have specific medical and social needs as they age. |To examine survival trends and risk factors in PWS, Manzardo et al. (2018) performed a survival analysis of the Prader-Willi Syndrome Association's 40-year mortality syndrome-specific database of 486 deaths. They compared 331 deaths that occurred between the years 2000 and 2015 (Recent) with 94 deaths that occurred before 2000 (Early). The risk for all-cause mortality in PWS was 1.5 (95% CI = 1.2-1.9) times higher for the Early than for the Recent cohort, reflected in female cardiac failure (hazard ratio (HR) = 1.8; 95% CI = 1.3-2.6), pulmonary embolism (HR = 6.1; 95% CI = 1.7-22), and gastrointestinal-related (HR = 3.2; 95% CI = 1.1-7.4) causes. Accidental deaths in males increased in the Recent cohort (HR = 5.7; 95% CI = 1.2-27.1), possibly due to enhanced weight management and mobility. Risk of death from respiratory failure was unchanged. |Butler et al. (2017) reviewed causes of death in Prader-Willi syndrome using the US Prader-Willi Syndrome Association 40-year mortality survey ranging from 1973 to 2015. A total of 486 deaths were reported (263 males, 217 females, 6 unknown) between 1973 and 2015, with mean age of 29.5 +/- 16 years (2 months-67 years); 70% occurred in adulthood. Respiratory failure was the most common cause, accounting for 31% of all deaths. Males were at increased risk for presumed hyperphagia-related accidents/injuries and cardiopulmonary factors compared to females. PWS maternal disomy 15 genetic subtype showed an increased risk of death from cardiopulmonary factors compared to the deletion subtype. |Villa et al. (1995) reported a 23-month-old boy with mental and psychomotor delay, minor craniofacial abnormalities, and obesity who had a de novo interstitial deletion of chromosome 6q16.2-q21. The authors noted the phenotypic similarities to Prader-Willi syndrome. In a boy with clinical features mimicking Prader-Willi syndrome, but with a normal chromosome 15, Stein et al. (1996) found a de novo interstitial deletion of 6q22.2-q23.1. The boy showed delayed development, hypotonia, seizures, hyperactive behavior, a bicuspid aortic valve with mild aortic stenosis, small hands and feet, hypogonadism, and obesity since about 4 years of age. In a 38-year-old man with moderate to severe intellectual delay, short stature, small hands and feet, small mouth, and obesity, Smith et al. (1999) found a duplication of 6q24.3-q27. The authors noted that the phenotype showed similarities to Prader-Willi syndrome. |As reviewed by Gilhuis et al. (2000), several obese patients with cytogenetic alterations in the same region of 6q had been reported; all had in common some clinical features, including obesity, hypotonia, and developmental delays, resembling Prader-Willi syndrome. However, their behavior, facial features, and additional neurologic abnormalities, as well as a lack of cytogenetic changes or imprinting mutations on chromosome 15, clearly distinguished this PWS-like phenotype from PWS patients. |Holder et al. (2000) studied a girl with early-onset obesity and a balanced translocation between 1p22.1 and 6q16.2. At 67 months of age she weighed 47.5 kg (+9.3 SD) and was 127.2 cm tall (+3.2 SD); her weight for height was +6.3 SD. The child displayed an aggressive, voracious appetite, and the obesity was thought to be due to high intake, since measured energy expenditure was normal. However, the authors noted that apart from her obesity, there were no features suggestive of PWS. Genetic analysis of the region on chromosome 6 showed that the translocation disrupted the SIM1 gene (603128). Holder et al. (2000) hypothesized that haploinsufficiency of the SIM1 gene may be responsible for the obesity. In a boy with a Prader-Willi-like phenotype, Faivre et al. (2002) identified a deletion of chromosome 6q16.1-q21. Intrauterine growth retardation, oligohydramnios, and a left clubfoot were noted during the third trimester of pregnancy. Later, generalized obesity, slightly dysmorphic facial features, small hands and feet, clumsiness, and mental retardation were observed. Molecular analysis showed that the deletion was paternal in origin and resulted in a deletion of the SIM1 gene. |
109720::Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is a chronic, progressive cholestatic liver disease that usually affects middle-aged women and eventually leads to liver failure (summary by Kaplan, 1996). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Primary Biliary Cirrhosis|Primary biliary cirrhosis-1 (PBC1) is significantly associated with SNPs at the IL12A locus (161560) on chromosome 3p12-q13.2.|Significant association of PBC has also been shown with SNPs at the HLA-DQB1 locus (604305) on chromosome 6p21.3 (PBC2; 613007), at the IL12RB2 locus (601642) on chromosome 1p31.2 (PBC3; 613008), at the IRF5 (607218)-TNPO3 (610032) locus on chromosome 7q32 (PBC4; 614220), and at the ZPBP2 locus (608499) on chromosome 17q12-q21 (PBC5; 614221).|See also Reynolds syndrome (613471), in which primary biliary cirrhosis is a feature.|Jaup and Zettergen (1980) studied familial incidence of primary biliary cirrhosis. In the study of patients with PBC and their relatives, Miller et al. (1983) used a method based on the finding that the in vitro addition of concanavalin A to pokeweed mitogen-stimulated lymphocytes activates suppressor cells, which in turn inhibit immunoglobulin synthesis. Significant impairment of IgG suppression was observed in 13 of 16 patients with PBC and 6 of 23 healthy relatives; all 6 relatives were females. No abnormal suppression was found in unrelated household contacts, patients with other forms of cirrhosis, or healthy controls. They suggested that the finding is not a result of the PBC but a genetic marker of susceptibility to the disorder. |Hirakata et al. (1988) described 2 unrelated patients with a combination of the CREST syndrome (181750) and primary biliary cirrhosis. |Tsuji et al. (1992) studied 18 healthy first-degree relatives of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis in 2 families. In each of these 2 families, there were 2 persons with PBC: 2 sisters in one family and a brother and sister in the other. |Kaplan (1996) reviewed all aspects of primary biliary cirrhosis, including the genetics. |
260000::type II primary hyperoxaluria (HP2) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the glyoxylate reductase/hydroxypyruvate reductase gene (GRHPR; 604296) on chromosome 9p13.For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of primary hyperoxaluria, see 259900.|Seargeant et al. (1991) reported 8 HP2 patients who belonged to 3 Saulteaux-Ojibway Canadian Indian families living in 2 isolated communities in northwestern Ontario. All had increased urinary oxalic acid and L-glyceric acid. Four patients presented with symptoms resulting from calcium oxalate nephrolithiasis, including dysuria, hematuria, and urinary tract infections in infancy or early childhood; 3 did not have recurrences. The other 4 affected patients were free of symptoms, suggesting that HP2 may be a much milder disease with a better long-term prognosis for renal function than HP1 (259900). Seargeant et al. (1991) noted that 7 of 8 previously reported patients (Williams and Smith, 1968 and Chalmers et al., 1984) had renal calculi between 18 months and 24 years of age. One patient seemed to have had no symptoms and was identified only because his younger brother had the disorder (Chalmers et al., 1984). |Kemper et al. (1997) stated that only 24 patients with primary hyperoxaluria type II had been reported, and noted that the disorder should be considered in any patient presenting with urolithiasis or nephrocalcinosis due to hyperoxaluria. The metabolic defect is deficiency of D-glycerate dehydrogenase/glyoxylate reductase leading to characteristic hyperoxaluria and excretion of L-glycerate, the cornerstone of diagnosis of this form of primary hyperoxaluria. Although development of terminal renal failure may be less common than in type I primary hyperoxaluria, chronic as well as terminal renal insufficiency has been described. Therefore, specific therapeutic measures should aim at reduction of urinary calcium oxalate saturation by potassium citrate or pyrophosphate to reduce the incidence of nephrolithiasis and nephrocalcinosis and thus improve renal survival. Secondary complications (obstruction, urinary tract infections, and pyelonephritis) must be avoided. In patients with terminal renal failure, renal transplantation seems to carry a high risk of disease recurrence. |Takayama et al. (2014) reported 4 Japanese patients with HP2. The patients developed symptoms of hematuria or urinary tract infection between 10 months and 3 years of age. All developed stones in the kidney or bladder, but only 1 patient showed renal parenchymal calcifications. Laboratory studies showed increased urinary oxalate and L-glycerate. All patients had normal renal function at follow-up between 7 and 25 years of age. |
248250::hypomagnesemia-3 (HOMG3) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the claudin-16 gene (CLDN16; 603959) on chromosome 3q28.|Familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis is a progressive renal disorder characterized by excessive urinary Ca(2+) and Mg(2+) excretion. There is progressive loss of kidney function, and in about 50% of cases, the need for renal replacement therapy arises as early as the second decade of life (summary by Muller et al., 2006). Amelogenesis imperfecta may also be present in some patients (Bardet et al., 2016). |A similar disorder with renal magnesium wasting, renal failure, and nephrocalcinosis (HOMG5; 248190) is caused by mutations in another tight-junction gene, CLDN19 (610036), and is distinguished by the association of severe ocular involvement.|For a discussion of phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity of familial hypomagnesemia, see HOMG1 (602014).|Friedman et al. (1967) described convulsions in infants in the neonatal period. Primary hypomagnesemia, thought to be due to a defect in intestinal absorption, was present. Associated hypocalcemia was corrected by administration of magnesium alone. The genetic basis of the defect was suggested by its persistence over a period of months and by the fact that the parents were first cousins. Salet et al. (1970) reported the disorder in brother and sister. |Manz et al. (1978) described 2 sisters with polyuria, hyposthenuria, hypomagnesemia, hypercalciuria, advanced nephrocalcinosis, low citrate excretion, and low glomerular filtration rates. Acid loading showed incomplete distal tubular acidosis. Hypomagnesium was due to renal magnesium wasting. Their hypothesis that the primary defect was one in renal tubular transport of magnesium was supported by the report by Passer (1976) of 2 adult patients with hypomagnesemia due to intestinal malabsorption combined with incomplete renal tubular acidosis. Both patients responded to Mg supplementation with correction of the renal acidification defect. Manz et al. (1978) suggested that the same disorder was present in the sibs reported by Michelis et al. (1972). Five pairs of affected sibs have been reported (see, e.g., Geven et al., 1987), including 2 instances of affected brother and sister (Evans et al., 1981). A parent (Paunier and Sizonenko, 1976) and a child (Freeman and Pearson, 1966) of a patient were said to be affected in other reports. |Hennekam and Donckerwolcke (1983) observed Chinese brother and sister with primary hypomagnesemia. The 5-year-old sister, the proband, was admitted to hospital because of tetany following gastroenteritis for several days. She had never before had spasms. Intravenous calcium gluconate had no effect, but after magnesium chloride intravenously, the tetany stopped at once. The affected 17-year-old brother was discovered on family screening. He complained of muscle weakness for more than 2 years and had paresthesias of the fingers and spontaneous spasms. During venipuncture, Trousseau sign was elicited. In the sister and brother, serum magnesium was 0.56 and 0.49 nmol/l, respectively (normal, 0.7-1.0), and serum calcium was 2.09 and 2.31 nmol/l, respectively (normal, 2.25-2.75). The parents denied consanguinity. These authors found a total of 32 reported cases of primary hypomagnesemia of which 10 were in females. Although symptoms usually began in the first 3 months of life, they were delayed to the 36th year in the extreme. Consanguineous parents were reported by Becker et al. (1979) and by Friedman et al. (1967). |Secondary magnesium-losing kidney can be caused by diuretics, gentamicin, mercury-containing laxatives, transplanted kidney, urinary tract obstruction, and the diuretic phase of acute renal failure. The disorder may be incorrectly diagnosed as primary hypoparathyroidism because of tetany and hypocalcemia, or as Bartter syndrome because of secondary renal potassium wasting. The diagnosis is made by finding hypomagnesemia with inappropriately high urinary magnesium excretion. Nephrocalcinosis is frequent. Chondrocalcinosis with arthritis is a recognized complication of magnesium depletion. Evans et al. (1981) reported 2 brothers, aged 39 and 29, with infertility and severe oligospermia but normal endocrine function. One of the brothers had sensorineural deafness. Neither deafness nor male infertility had been reported previously in this disorder. Dudin and Teebi (1987) described primary hypomagnesemia with secondary hypocalcemia as a cause of infantile tetany and convulsions in an Arab girl of consanguineous parentage. |Praga et al. (1995) used the designation 'familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis' and cited the patients reported by Michelis et al. (1972), Manz et al. (1978), Evans et al. (1981), Ulmann et al. (1985), and Rodriguez-Soriano et al. (1987) as examples of this disorder. They studied 8 patients from 5 different families. Mean age at diagnosis was 15 years with a range from 5 to 25. All 8 patients had polyuria-polydipsia; 5 had ocular abnormalities (corneal calcifications, chorioretinitis, nystagmus, myopia); 5 had recurrent urinary tract infections; and 2 had recurrent renal colic with passage of stones. Bilateral nephrocalcinosis was observed in all cases. The mean serum magnesium was 1.1 mg/dl with inappropriately high urinary magnesium excretions (70 mg/day). Hypercalciuria was present in every case except in those with advanced renal insufficiency. Serum parathormone levels were abnormally high. Serum Mg and urinary Ca became normal after renal transplantation in 5 patients. None of the 26 members of 4 of the affected families showed hypomagnesemia, renal insufficiency, or nephrocalcinosis; however, 11 (42%) had hypercalciuria and 4 of them presented with recurrent renal stones. Two family members had medullary sponge kidneys. In 1 family, 2 affected individuals were double first cousins. The daughters of 2 sisters married 2 brothers. In another family, the affected brother and sister in one sibship were cousins of an affected female in a first-cousin sibship. Praga et al. (1995) speculated that isolated hypercalciuria might be a heterozygous manifestation. |Challa et al. (1994) described 2 female sibs with primary idiopathic hypomagnesemia, born to consanguineous parents. Both presented at 6 weeks of age, with convulsions and persistent hypocalcemia, which could not be controlled with anticonvulsants and/or calcium gluconate. Serum magnesium values of the mother and father were just below the normal range with normal serum calcium.|Shalev et al. (1998) described the clinical presentation and long-term outcomes of 15 patients with autosomal recessive primary familial hypomagnesemia. The most common (67%) presenting events were generalized hypocalcemic-hypomagnesemic seizures at a mean age of 4.9 weeks. Thirteen infants who were treated soon after diagnosis with high-dose enteral magnesium developed normally. Their serum calcium returned to normal concentrations, but serum magnesium could not be maintained at normal concentrations. Delay in establishing a diagnosis led to a convulsive disorder with permanent neurologic impairment in 2 infants. Reported complications of prolonged hypomagnesemia such as renal stones, hypertension, arrhythmias, sudden death, or dyslipidemia were not observed. |Bardet et al. (2016) examined 5 unrelated patients with familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis due to CLDN16 mutations. The patients were from diverse geographic backgrounds and ranged in age from 6 to 45 years. Detailed dental examination revealed enamel defects characteristic of amelogenesis imperfecta, including demarcated and diffuse opacities, reduced amount of enamel with pitted defects, and/or horizontal grooves. Several permanent teeth failed to erupt in 2 patients, with persistence of deciduous teeth in one. Cone beam computed tomography in these 2 patients revealed tooth ankylosis. No gingival hyperplasia was observed in any of the patients. |Muller et al. (2003) studied a Scandinavian family in which 3 of 5 sibs had self-limiting childhood hypercalciuria. The proband came to attention because of nocturnal enuresis and was found to have marked hypercalciuria and renal medullary nephrocalcinosis. The mother reported nocturnal enuresis and urinary tract infections in 2 older sibs who were found to be similarly affected. During a 6-year follow-up period, urinary Ca(2+) excretion decreased in each consecutive year in the affected children and, despite their age differences, there was a clear linear decrease over time in all patients. In the oldest affected sib, normal values for Ca(2+) excretion were found at the time of last examination, although nephrocalcinosis was still detectable on renal ultrasound. Glomerular filtration rate remained normal in all 3 affected children, with no evidence of further progression of medullary nephrocalcinosis. In all affected members, Mg(2+) levels were within the low normal range, although they were consistently lower than in the unaffected members of the family and urinary Mg(2+) excretion was slightly elevated. |In addition to the family of Scandinavian origin with 3 affected sibs, Muller et al. (2003) also studied a Spanish family in which the parents were second-degree relatives and 1 of 4 brothers had childhood self-limiting hypercalciuria. The boy first came to attention at the age of 5 years for recurring urinary tract infections and nephrolithiasis. During follow-up, urinary Ca(2+) excretion decreased and was within normal range at the age of 20 years, and nephrocalcinosis did not show progression. |
601104::progressive supranuclear palsy-1 (PSNP1) can be caused by heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT; 157140) on chromosome 17.|Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is the second most frequent cause of degenerative parkinsonism. In addition to parkinsonism, the clinical symptoms include early postural instability, supranuclear gaze palsy, and cognitive decline. Neuropathologically, the disorder is characterized by abundant neurofibrillary tangles, which differ in both distribution and composition from those associated with Alzheimer disease. In progressive supranuclear palsy, the tangles are primarily localized to subcortical regions and are found in both neurons and glia, whereas in Alzheimer disease they are more widespread, largely cortical, and limited to neurons. They also have different characteristics at the ultrastructural level (Baker et al., 1999). |Kertesz (2003) suggested the term 'Pick complex' to represent the overlapping syndromes of frontotemporal dementia (FTD; 600274), primary progressive aphasia (PPA), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), progressive supranuclear palsy, and FTD with motor neuron disease. He noted that frontotemporal dementia may also be referred to as 'clinical Pick disease,' and that the term 'Pick disease' (172700) should be restricted to the pathologic finding of Pick bodies. |Genetic Heterogeneity of Progressive Supranuclear Palsy|Other loci for PSP have been mapped to chromosome 1q31 (PSNP2; 609454) and 11p12-p11 (PSNP3; 610898).See also Parkinson-dementia syndrome and atypical progressive supranuclear palsy (260540).|Rojo et al. (1999) reported 12 pedigrees of familial progressive supranuclear palsy, confirmed by pathology in 4 probands. Pathologic diagnosis was confirmed by internationally agreed criteria. The spectrum of the clinical phenotypes in these families was variable, including 34 typical cases of PSP (12 probands plus 22 secondary cases), 3 patients with postural tremor, 3 with dementia, 1 with parkinsonism, 2 with tremor, dystonia, gaze palsy, and tics, and 1 with gait disturbance. Ros et al. (2005) provided an update on 1 of the families reported by Rojo et al. (1999). Three family members were affected. At 37 years of age, the proband developed an akinetic-rigid syndrome, gait disturbance, frequent falls, micrographia, dysarthria, eyelid apraxia, abolition of upgaze, and hyperreflexia with unilateral extensor plantar response. PET scan showed reduced striatal fluorodopa uptake. The patient showed disease progression, with axial dystonia, mutism, complete vertical gaze palsy, and dysphagia, leading to death at age 45 years. Neuropathologic examination showed atrophy of the mesencephalon, pons, striatum, and subthalamic nuclei, and depigmentation of the substantia nigra. There was tau protein accumulation in neurons and glia, primarily in the mesencephalon. Protein analysis of brain tissue detected hyperphosphorylated tau protein and overexpression of tau isoforms with 4 microtubule-binding repeats. |Nath et al. (2003) provided a detailed review of the clinical features of 187 patients with PSP in the United Kingdom. The most common symptoms included bradykinesia, falls, cognitive impairment, bulbar or language problems, and visual disturbances, such as diplopia. Other variable features included tremor, retrocollis, limb dystonia, and favorable response to levodopa. Average age at onset was 66 years, and the mean survival was 5 to 6 years. |Tuite et al. (2005) reported a family in which several members had clinical features consistent with PSP and others had features consistent with corticobasal degeneration. Neuropathologic examination of 2 affected sibs showed features of PSP in 1 sib and features of CBD in the other. Specifically, PSP features included tufted astrocytes, whereas CBD features included ballooned neurons and astrocytic plaques. Both patients had severe neuronal loss in the substantia nigra. Genetic studies of 4 affected family members demonstrated the H1/H1 tau haplotype, but no mutations in the MAPT gene were identified. There was a history of remote consanguinity, and Tuite et al. (2005) suggested a unifying genetic etiology in this family. |Donker Kaat et al. (2009) reported 176 patients who fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for PSP, including 65 possible, 91 probable, and 20 definite. The mean age at PSP onset was 66.5 years. Presenting symptoms included gait disorder with falls (65%), behavioral changes (21%), bradykinesia (20%), cognitive decline (16%), stiffness (14%), speech problems (9%), visual complaints (6%), and tremor (4%). Tremor at disease onset occurred significantly more frequently in patients with PSP who had a positive family history compared to patients who did not (9% vs 1%, p = 0.02). Neuropathologic examination of 20 patients were consistent with the diagnosis. Detailed results of 5 patients showed mild frontal atrophy and depigmentation of the substantia nigra and locus ceruleus. There was severe neuronal loss and gliosis in the pallidum, subthalamic nucleus, and substantia nigra. Immunohistochemistry with the MAPT AT8 antibody (which stains 4-repeat tau) showed neurofibrillary tangles, tufted astrocytes, and coiled bodies with threads in the striatum and caudate; a variable number of these were found in the subthalamic nucleus and thalamus. The neocortex showed a few pre-tangles and tufted astrocytes in the frontal, temporal, and parietal cortex. |Piccini et al. (2001) studied regional cerebral dopaminergic function and glucose metabolism in members of 2 large kindreds with familial PSP in an effort to identify subclinical cases. They studied 3 clinically affected PSP patients who showed significant reduction in caudate and putamen uptake of (18)F-dopa in positron emission tomography (PET) studies, along with a significant reduction in striatal, lateral, and medial premotor area and dorsal prefrontal cortex glucose metabolism. In 4 of 15 asymptomatic relatives, caudate and putamen (18)F-dopa uptake was 2.5 SDs lower than the normal mean. These 4 subjects and a fifth asymptomatic relative with normal (18)F-dopa uptake showed a significant reduction of cortical and striatal glucose metabolism in a pattern similar to that of their affected relatives. |To calculate the rate of brain atrophy in 6 patients with PSP, Josephs et al. (2006) used serial MRI scans and a technique called the 'boundary shift integral,' which calculates the integral change in the brain/CSF fluid boundary over the interior and exterior surfaces of the brain. The mean interval between baseline and final MRI scan was 3.1 years. PSP Patients had a rate of cerebral atrophy and ventricular expansion of 1.3% and 7% per year, respectively, compared to 0.4% and 1.8%, respectively, in control individuals. Josephs et al. (2006) suggested that these benchmark rates and the boundary shift integral technique could be used to monitor disease progression and response to therapy in PSP. |Nicholl et al. (2003) described a form of PSP characterized by fatal respiratory hypoventilation in 2 sibs from a consanguineous marriage. The authors called the disorder 'tauopathy and respiratory failure.' The 29-year-old pregnant sister developed dyspnea with stridor, and later had a generalized seizure that left her unconscious. Despite therapy, she died after 9 days. Her 30-year-old brother developed cough syncope, dyspnea, and central apnea, which progressed over 40 months, leading to death at age 34 years. During the illness, he showed slow smooth pursuit and impaired saccades, mild rigidity and bradykinesia, and myoclonic jerks. Neuropathologic examination showed widespread neuronal eosinophilia and pyknosis with gliosis in multiple brain regions, consistent with hypoxic brain damage. There was pervasive tau pathology in neuronal perikarya, neurites, and threads in the gray matter of the hippocampus, thalamus, and pons, but not in the cerebral cortex. Functional studies indicated that the mutated protein showed reduced binding to microtubules as well as increased fibrillization and aggregation. Both sibs carried the H1/H1 haplotype associated with PSP. Nicholl et al. (2003) commented on the unusual apparent autosomal recessive inheritance of this tauopathy. In a review of the role of tau in neurodegenerative diseases, Quadros et al. (2007) classified the disorder in the sibs reported by Nicholl et al. (2003) as PSP. |
600634::prolactin-secreting pituitary adenomas can be caused by mutation in the AIP gene (605555) on chromosome 11q13.|Prolactin-secreting pituitary adenoma, or prolactinoma, is the most common type of hormonally active pituitary adenoma. These tumors can also be seen as a feature of multiple endocrine neoplasia type I (MEN1; 131100).See also 102200 for a discussion of familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA) and acromegaly due to a growth hormone (GH; 139250)-secreting pituitary adenoma, which are also caused by mutation in the AIP gene.Schlechte (2003) discussed prolactinoma in general terms as a clinical, diagnostic, and therapeutic problem. |Berezin and Karasik (1995) studied 4 families in each of which more than one member were found to have prolactinoma. They concluded that there is a familial tendency to prolactinoma independent of its association with MEN1. |
170100::prolidase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the PEPD gene (613230) on chromosome 19q13.|Prolidase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive multisystem disorder associated with massive imidodipeptiduria and lack of or reduced prolidase activity in erythrocytes, leukocytes, or cultured fibroblasts. The disorder is clinically heterogeneous and severity varies widely. Features include chronic, slowly healing ulcerations, mainly on the legs and feet. The ulcers are often preceded by other dermatologic manifestations that may occur anywhere and include erythematous papular eruptions, telangiectasias with pruritus and photosensitivity, impetigo-like eruptions, pruritic eczematous lesions, and necrotic papules. Mild to severe mental retardation is often a feature, and recurrent respiratory tract infections, sometimes fatal, are common. Facial dysmorphism may include low hairline and hirsutism, saddle nose, ocular hypertelorism, micrognathia, a high-arched palate, mandibular protrusion, and exophthalmos. Clinical manifestations are usually detectable after birth or in early childhood, but late-onset cases have been reported (summary by Lupi et al., 2008). |Powell et al. (1974) described a patient who excreted massive amounts of glycyl-L-proline and other di- and tri-peptides containing proline. Prolidase, the enzyme known to cleave the bond between the other amino acid and proline (which is carboxyl-terminal), was found to be absent or markedly decreased in the patient's red and white cells. The mother and maternal grandfather had intermediate levels. The father was not available for study. The parents were not known to be related. The proband was a 7-year-old white male with dry, cracked erythematous palms and soles and with obesity from an early age. Mild mental retardation and 'mild diffuse demineralization' of long bones were described. |Powell et al. (1975) studied 2 children with prolidase deficiency. Clinical features included chronic dermatitis, frequent infections, splenomegaly, and massive imidodipeptiduria. Powell et al. (1977) reported that chronic ear and sinus infections, chronic skin lesions, and splenomegaly were features.|Sheffield et al. (1977) described an 11-year-old boy who was born of consanguineous parents and presented distinctive clinical features of recurrent skin ulceration, lymphedema, hepatosplenomegaly, and mild mental retardation. Massive amounts of dipeptides, most of which had proline or hydroxyproline as the carboxyl residue, were excreted in the urine. Glycylproline predominated. Prolidase deficiency was demonstrable in red cells, fibroblasts, and continuous lymphocyte cultures. |Myara et al. (1984) stated that about 20 cases of prolidase deficiency had been reported. Dermatologic features, particularly severe leg ulcers, and mental retardation of variable severity were the main manifestations (Der Kaloustian et al., 1982). Recurrent infections might be due to a disturbance of complement component C1q, which contains a large amount of iminoacids. Most patients have an unusual facial appearance as well as splenomegaly. After gelatin ingestion, excretion of iminoacids in the urine is increased, indicating that iminoacid absorption in the intestine is not modified even though prolidase is deficient in the intestine. Freij et al. (1984) described affected brothers. |Leoni et al. (1987) described prolidase deficiency in 2 sisters who suffered from recurrent leg ulcers, which first appeared in early childhood. Milligan et al. (1989) described a patient in whom chronic leg ulceration was due to prolidase deficiency. They added erosive cystitis as a feature of the disorder. |Shrinath et al. (1997) described 2 children with prolidase deficiency who developed clinical and immunologic abnormalities consistent with a diagnosis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; 152700). The first child died from septicemia, and SLE was diagnosed only during his terminal illness. As a result of this diagnosis, his cousin, who was already known to have prolidase deficiency, was investigated further and a diagnosis of SLE was confirmed. Following treatment with oral prednisolone, her clinical condition improved, although she had a persistently raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate and florid facial rash. Both prolidase deficiency and SLE are associated with disturbances in immune function and have clinical features in common. Prolidase deficiency may be a risk factor for SLE. Shrinath et al. (1997) suggested that patients with SLE should be specifically investigated for prolidase deficiency, especially where there is a family history of SLE or presentation of SLE in childhood, since standard immunologic or hematologic investigations will not identify the biochemical abnormalities characteristic of prolidase deficiency. |Falik-Zaccai et al. (2010) reported 20 patients from 10 kindreds with prolidase deficiency in northern Israel. There were 7 Druze and 3 Arab Muslim families. All presented with some degree of developmental delay, most with moderate cognitive or speech delay. All also had some degree of facial dysmorphism, including ocular hypertelorism, exophthalmos, upward or downward slanting palpebral fissures, small-beaked nose, low posterior hairline, facial hirsutism, and a slender upper lip. Dermatologic manifestations included erythematous papular eruptions, impetigo-like eruptions, pseudo-psoriasis skin lesions, and pruritic eczematous lesions. Other more variable features included splenomegaly, hepatitis-like symptoms, osteomyelitis, recurrent lung infections, and asthma. One patient had chronic lung disease resembling cystic fibrosis (CF; 219700), and 2 developed SLE. The phenotype was highly heterogeneous, and there was great inter- and intrafamilial variability. In 1 family, the severity ranged from death in infancy to an essentially asymptomatic adult with minor facial dysmorphism and mental deficits. |
606054::propionic acidemia is caused by mutation in the genes encoding propionyl-CoA carboxylase, PCCA (232000) or PCCB (232050). Cells from patients with mutations in the PCCA gene fall into complementation group pccA. Cells from patients with mutations in the PCCB gene fall into complementation group pccBC. Mutations in the pccB subgroup occur in the N terminus of the PCCB gene, which includes the biotin-binding site, whereas mutations in the pccC subgroup occur in the C terminus of the PCCB gene (Fenton et al., 2001).|The features of propionic acidemia are episodic vomiting, lethargy and ketosis, neutropenia, periodic thrombocytopenia, hypogammaglobulinemia, developmental retardation, and intolerance to protein. Outstanding chemical features are hyperglycinemia and hyperglycinuria. This disorder is not to be confused with hereditary glycinuria (138500), which is presumably transmitted as a dominant.|Soriano et al. (1967) suggested that in the disorder first described by Childs et al. (1961), a generalized defect in utilization of amino acids results in excessive deamination of certain amino acids in muscle, with consequent hyperammonemia and ketoacidosis. In a second group of patients whose disorder is also termed hyperglycinemia, ketoacidosis, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia have not been observed and glycine is the only amino acid present in excess in serum and urine; see glycine encephalopathy (605899). |Hsia et al. (1969) studied fibroblasts from a sister of the boy described by Childs et al. (1961) and demonstrated deficient propionate carboxylation as the basic defect in ketotic hyperglycinemia. Hsia et al. (1971) also showed that 'ketotic hyperglycinemia' is the same as propionic acidemia and is the result of a defect in PCC. In further studies on this patient, Brandt et al. (1974) demonstrated that with low protein diet, growth and intelligence developed normally to age 9 years; indeed, intelligence was superior. The family originally reported by Childs et al. (1961) had the pccA type of propionic acidemia (Wolf, 1986). |In a male Pakistani offspring of first-cousin parents, Gompertz et al. (1970) described acidosis and ketosis due to propionic acidemia, leading to death at 8 days of age. A sib had died at 2 weeks of age with metabolic acidosis and ketonuria. The defect was found to involve mitochondrial propionyl-CoA carboxylase. The same condition was described by Hommes et al. (1968). |Al Essa et al. (1998) pointed out that not only do acute intercurrent infections precipitate acidosis in propionic acidemia, but such infections are unusually frequent in propionic acidemia in Saudi Arabia. Propionic acidemia is unusually frequent in Saudi Arabia, with a frequency of 1 in 2,000 to 1 in 5,000, depending on the region. The disorder has a severe phenotype in Saudi Arabia. Al Essa et al. (1998) had information on approximately 90 patients; certain tribes accounted for almost 80% of these cases, suggesting a founder effect. The number of other cases of organic acidemias observed during the same period was 656. Longitudinal data, in some instances up to 8 years, were available for 38 patients with propionic acidemia. A high frequency of infections was observed in 80% of the patients. Most microorganisms implicated were unusual, suggesting an underlying immune deficiency. The infections occurred despite aggressive treatment with appropriate diets, carnitine, and, during acute episodes of the disease, with metronidazole, which suggested a global effect of the disease on T and B lymphocytes as well as on the bone marrow cells. |In a review of inherited metabolic disorders and stroke, Testai and Gorelick (2010) noted that patients with branched-chain organic aciduria, including isovaleric aciduria (243500), propionic aciduria, and methylmalonic aciduria (251000) can rarely have strokes. Cerebellar hemorrhage has been described in all 3 disorders, and basal ganglia ischemic stroke has been described in propionic aciduria and methylmalonic aciduria. These events may occur in the absence of metabolic decompensation. |
600955::proprotein convertase 1/3 deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the PC1 gene (PCSK1; 162150) on chromosome 5q15.|O'Rahilly et al. (1995) reported a 43-year-old woman who was referred for the evaluation of symptoms suggestive of postprandial hypoglycemia. She had a history of severe childhood obesity, with weight of 36 kg at the age of 3 years, for which she had been treated successfully with diet. Development of secondary sexual characteristics was normal, but she had primary amenorrhea. At the age of 30, ovulation was induced with gonadotropins, and she became pregnant and delivered healthy quadruplets. The pregnancy was complicated by gestational diabetes mellitus that required treatment with insulin. After the pregnancy, her fasting plasma glucose level was normal, but persistent amenorrhea prevailed. Plasma concentrations of proinsulin, and plasma insulin concentrations were low, suggesting an abnormality of proinsulin processing. In addition, there was evidence of impaired processing of proopiomelanocortin (POMC; 176830), secondary hypocortisolism, and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, suggesting the possibility of a more generalized defect related to impaired processing of prohormones. Since proinsulin has about 5% of the biologic activity of insulin, this patient's beta cells had compensated for the failure of normal processing in the basal state. The authors speculated that a combination of impaired glucose tolerance and reactive hypoglycemia 5 hours after a meal was probably related to the considerably slower clearance of proinsulin. The findings in the patient suggested a defect in prohormone convertase 1, which cleaves proinsulin between the 32 position and the 33 position, rather than in proconvertase-2 (162151), which cleaves it between the 65 position and the 66 position. O'Rahilly et al. (1995) noted that the only living relatives the patient had were her 4 children; all had a slight increase in their fasting plasma proinsulin concentration relative to the concentration of 32,33 split proinsulin, consistent with a mild defect in PC1 activity. The authors noted that in the mouse, an obesity-diabetes syndrome elicited by a genetic defect in a prohormone processing pathway was described by Naggert et al. (1995); see 114855. |Jackson et al. (1997) noted that 2 specific syndromes caused by abnormalities in the secretory products of pancreatic beta cells had been defined; mutations in the insulin gene that lead to the production of biologically ineffective insulin (see 176730.0005), and mutations in the insulin gene that affect the cleavage of proinsulin which lead to the secretion of excessive amounts of proinsulin (see 176730.0003). |Jackson et al. (2003) reported a female infant who presented on the third postnatal day with persistent, treatment-refractory diarrhea. Malabsorption of monosaccharides and fat was confirmed. She was hypocortisolemic, became grossly obese despite low calorie intake, and suffered a fatal cardiopulmonary arrest at age 18 months. Small intestinal biopsies showed persistent, patchy, normoplastic villous atrophy with occasional inflammatory cells in the lamina propria. Plasma proinsulin was high and insulin low, suggesting a processing defect. Reexamination of the patient originally reported by O'Rahilly et al. (1995) revealed a lifelong history of gastrointestinal disturbance and small intestinal malabsorption. Further studies showed an increase in progastrin and proglucagon, showing that prohormone processing in enteroendocrine cells was abnormal. |Farooqi et al. (2007) described a 6-year-old boy, born of consanguineous Libyan parents, who had watery diarrhea with malabsorption of monosaccharides and fat that began shortly after birth. At 4 years of age, he developed polyuria and polydipsia suggestive of diabetes insipidus, although serum osmolality was not elevated, and a water deprivation test was nondiagnostic. At 6 years of age, the boy was evaluated for severe obesity and was found to have an appropriate leptin (164160) level but a highly abnormal insulin to proinsulin ratio. Evaluation of his metabolic phenotype revealed a degree of hyperphagia comparable to that seen in patients with melanocortin-4 receptor mutations (155541) and a normal basal metabolic rate. He had a low serum cortisol level and ACTH precursor levels were found to be markedly elevated, consistent with a degree of impaired proopiomelanocortin (POMC; 176830) processing, whereas plasma ACTH levels were normal. He also had an elevated TSH with a free T(4) concentration at the lower end of the normal range, consistent with hypothalamic hypothyroidism. |
176807::many genes are involved in the origin and/or progression of this neoplasm.|Genetic Heterogeneity of Susceptibility to Prostate Cancer|See HPC1 (601518), associated with variation in the RNASEL gene on chromosome 1q25; HPC2 (614731), associated with variation in the ELAC2 gene (605367) on chromosome 17p12; HPC3 (608656), mapped to chromosome 20q13; HPC4 (608658), mapped to chromosome 7p11-q21; HPC5 (609299), mapped to chromosome 3p26; HPC6 (609558), mapped to chromosome 22q12; HPC7 (610321), mapped to chromosome 15q12; HPC8 (602759), mapped to chromosome 1q42.2-q43; HPC9 (610997), associated with variation in the HOXB13 gene (604607) on chromosome 17q21-q22; HPC10 (611100), mapped to chromosome 8q24; HPC11 (611955), mapped to chromosome 17q12; HPC12 (611868), associated with variation in the EHBP1 gene (609922) on chromosome 2p15; HPC13 (611928), associated with variation in the MSMB gene (611928) on chromosome 10q11; HPC14 (611958), mapped to chromosome 11q13; HPC15 (611959), mapped to chromosome 19q13; HPCX1 (300147), mapped to chromosome Xq27-q28; and HPCX2 (300704), mapped to chromosome Xp11.|Somatic mutations in several genes have been found in prostate cancer tumors, including PTEN (601728), MAD1L1 (602686), ATBF1 (ZFHX3; 104155), PLXNB1 (601053), and KLF6 (602053).|Somatic mutations in the EPHB2 gene (600997) are associated with susceptibility to prostate cancer/brain cancer (603688).|A prostate cancer aggressiveness quantitative trait locus (HPCQTL19; 607592) has been mapped to chromosome 19q.|The aggressiveness of prostate cancer varies widely. Some tumors progress to invasive, potentially life-threatening disease, whereas others stay latent for the remainder of an individual's lifetime.|
177735::autosomal dominant pseudohypoaldosteronism type I (PHA1A) is caused by heterozygous mutation in the mineralocorticoid receptor gene (MCR, NR3C2; 600983) on chromosome 4q31.|Autosomal dominant pseudohypoaldosteronism type I is characterized by salt wasting resulting from renal unresponsiveness to mineralocorticoids. Patients may present with neonatal renal salt wasting with hyperkalaemic acidosis despite high aldosterone levels. These patients improve with age and usually become asymptomatic without treatment. Some adult patients with the disorder may have elevated aldosterone levels, but no history of clinical disease. This observation suggests that only those infants whose salt homeostasis is stressed by intercurrent illness and volume depletion develop clinically recognized PHA I (summary by Geller et al., 1998). |Autosomal recessive pseudohypoaldosteronism type I (PHA1B; 264350), caused by mutation in any one of 3 genes encoding the epithelial sodium channel (ENaC), is a similar but more severe systemic disorder with persistence into adulthood.|Cheek and Perry (1958) first described pseudohypoaldosteronism in infancy due to a renal tubular defect. The patient had renal salt wasting associated with normal renal and adrenal function. The condition was corrected by sodium chloride supplementation, but was refractory to exogenous mineralocorticoid without added salt. The authors suggested a defect in renal tubular response to mineralocorticoids. There was no family history of a similar disorder. Armanini et al. (1985) studied the original patient of Cheek and Perry (1958), then 28 years old, and found absent or greatly reduced high-affinity receptor binding sites for aldosterone on monocytes, suggesting that the basic defect resides in the aldosterone receptor. Other reports of the same condition soon followed the report of Cheek and Perry (1958) (Donnell et al., 1959 and Raine and Roy, 1962); the parents of all of these children were clinically unaffected. |Hanukoglu (1991) reported a family with autosomal dominant inheritance of PHA (Hanukoglu et al., 1978). The proband presented with renal salt wasting in infancy, associated with vomiting, failure to thrive, and short stature. Laboratory studies showed hyponatremia and hyperkalemia, with a dramatic response to a high salt diet. Sodium supplementation was discontinued at the age of 2 years. There were 7 additional family members from 3 generations who had variable expression of PHA, ranging from asymptomatic to moderate. In affected members, pseudohypoaldosteronism persisted over 13 years; however, the plasma renin (179820) activity (PRA) decreased gradually to near-normal values. Persistent pseudohypoaldosteronism in the face of a decrease in PRA was interpreted by Hanukoglu (1991) as reflecting the development of tertiary pseudohypoaldosteronism due to autonomously functioning zona glomerulosa of the adrenal. |Riepe et al. (2006) reported 7 patients presenting with isolated renal salt loss from 6 families in Italy and Germany. All manifested in early infancy with poor weight gain, failure to thrive, dehydration, or vomiting. The diagnosis of PHA1 was established by the confirmation of hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, elevated plasma renin activity or direct renin concentrations, and high plasma aldosterone levels. All patients were treated with oral sodium supplementation. |
264470::peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency is caused by homozygous mutation in the gene encoding peroxisomal straight-chain acyl-CoA oxidase (ACOX1; 609751) on chromosome 17q25.|Peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency is a disorder of peroxisomal fatty acid beta-oxidation. See also D-bifunctional protein deficiency (261515), caused by mutation in the HSD17B4 gene (601860) on chromosome 5q2. The clinical manifestations of these 2 deficiencies are similar to those of disorders of peroxisomal assembly, including Zellweger cerebrohepatorenal syndrome (see 214100) and neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (see 601539) (Watkins et al., 1995). |Poll-The et al. (1988) reported a brother and sister, born of first-cousin parents, with neonatal hypotonia, seizures, apneic spells, delayed psychomotor development, and neurologic regression after age 2 years. Brain imaging showed progressive white-matter demyelination without cortical malformations. Biochemical analysis showed accumulation of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA) resulting from an isolated deficiency of peroxisomal fatty acyl-CoA oxidase. The clinical findings resembled neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy, but liver biopsy showed that hepatic peroxisomes were not decreased in number and were enlarged in size. In addition, there was no accumulation of pipecolic acid or bile acid synthesis intermediates, and there was no marked decrease in plasmalogens. |Suzuki et al. (1994) described a Japanese brother and sister, born of consanguineous parents, with isolated peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency determined by complementation analysis. Both patients showed profound hypotonia and dysmorphic features, including hypertelorism, epicanthus, low nasal bridge, low-set ears, and polydactyly. Immunoblot analysis showed some residual acyl-CoA oxidase protein. Suzuki et al. (2002) provided follow-up of the patients reported by Suzuki et al. (1994) and reported a third unrelated affected Japanese child. The 2 sibs showed neurologic regression at ages 34 and 26 months, respectively. At age 11 years, the boy was deaf and needed tube feedings. The sister died at age 4 years from respiratory problems. The third child showed mild hypotonia and nystagmus in the neonatal period, and developed seizures at 2 months of age. Neurologic regression occurred at age 28 months, and she showed severe hypotonia, dysphagia, hyperreflexia of the lower limbs, extensor plantar responses, and retinal degeneration. No dysmorphic features were observed. The child died of respiratory failure at 42 months of age. MRI showed demyelination of the pontomedullary corticospinal tracts and cerebellar white matter, similar to that seen in adult patients with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD; 300100). |Watkins et al. (1995) found that patients with acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency had a milder initial course than did those with bifunctional enzyme deficiency. None of the patients had dysmorphic features, but all developed progressive leukodystrophy between 2 and 3 years of age, resulting in blindness, deafness, and spasticity. Patients with acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency had milder elevations of VLCFAs, and lesser impairment of beta-oxidation and alpha-oxidation of phytanic acid in fibroblasts than did patients with bifunctional enzyme deficiency. Watkins et al. (1995) summarized their experience with peroxisomal disorders indicating that 10% of patients initially diagnosed with a disorder of peroxisome assembly were ultimately found to have a deficiency of a peroxisomal beta-oxidation enzyme. |Kurian et al. (2004) reported a 10-month-old girl who showed developmental regression at age 7 months, after which she developed irritability, abnormal stereotypic movements, and excessive startle response to auditory stimuli. Dysmorphic features included brachycephaly, marked frontal bossing, broad, depressed nasal bridge, mild hypertelorism, convergent squint, and bilateral nipple inversion. She had marked axial and peripheral hypotonia, and no eye contact or social interaction. Other features included left subretinal pigmentary retinopathy, bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, and mild hepatomegaly with increased echogenicity suggestive of fatty infiltration. Biochemical analysis showed increased serum VLCFA and markedly reduced acyl-CoA oxidase activity with absence of the protein. At age 2.5 years, MRI showed abnormal white matter signals in the brainstem and cerebellum. Kurian et al. (2004) noted that dysmorphic features have only rarely been reported in acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency. |Ferdinandusse et al. (2007) reported 22 patients with acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency confirmed by genetic analysis. Clinical features included hypotonia, seizures, failure to thrive, visual system failure, impaired hearing and vision, loss of motor achievements, hepatomegaly, dysmorphism, brain white matter abnormalities, and osteopenia. The mean age of developmental regression was 28 months, and the mean age at death was 5 years. |Carrozzo et al. (2008) reported a patient with severe acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency, born of consanguineous parents of Italian ancestry. Two previous pregnancies had resulted in miscarriages. In infancy, the proband showed severe generalized hypotonia and generalized seizures with myoclonic jerks. He had severe psychomotor delay and did not achieve postural control. Spastic tetraplegia and poor response to visual and auditory stimuli were apparent by age 4 years. Language development was virtually absent. Brain MRI at age 5.2 years showed brain atrophy, severe white matter abnormalities and peripheral contrast enhancement, hyperintensty of corticopontine tracts, and thinning of the corpus callosum. Funduscopy showed bilateral optic atrophy, and there was a mild sensorineural hearing defect. Liver enzymes were elevated, and the liver showed hyperechogenicity. Laboratory studies showed increased VLCFAs and lack of ACOX1 activity in fibroblasts. The disorder was progressive, and the child died of respiratory failure at age 5.4 years. Genetic analysis identified a homozygous deletion involving the ACOX1 gene (609751.0007). Analysis of chorionic villus sampling identified the disorder in a fourth pregnancy, which was subsequently terminated at 13 weeks' gestation. |
264070::tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)-deficient hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) due to pterin-4-alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase deficiency (HPABH4D) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the PCBD gene (126090), which encodes an enzyme involved in the salvage pathway for BH4, on chromosome 10q22.|Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)-deficient hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) D is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by mild transient hyperphenylalaninemia often detected by newborn screening. Patients also show increased excretion of 7-biopterin. Affected individuals are asymptomatic and show normal psychomotor development, although transient neurologic deficits in infancy have been reported (Thony et al., 1998). Patients may also develop hypomagnesemia and nonautoimmune diabetes mellitus during puberty (summary by Ferre et al., 2014). |For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of BH4-deficient hyperphenylalaninemia, see HPABH4A (261640).|Primapterinuria, a variant form of hyperphenylalaninemia, is characterized by excretion of 7-substituted pterins in urine (Curtius et al., 1988). Patients were reported by Dhondt et al. (1987, 1988), Blaskovics and Giudici (1988), and Blau et al. (1988). Patients with primapterinuria show an increased ratio of neopterin to biopterin in the urine, excretion of subnormal levels of biopterins, and normal levels of biogenic amines in cerebrospinal fluid. In all cases, hyperphenylalaninemia was transient. Loading tests with tetrahydrobiopterin and sepiapterin suggested that 7-biopterin (primapterin) is formed by rearrangement from 6-substituted pterins (Giudici et al., 1991). |Blau et al. (1992) proposed that carbinolamine dehydratase deficiency is responsible for the findings in a female patient studied in detail. A brother showed a similar pterin pattern, had had a transient plasma phenylalanine elevation in the neonatal period, and was later clinically normal. Adler et al. (1992) independently suspected that carbinolamine dehydratase is the site of the deficiency. Furthermore, they performed kinetic experiments to verify that tetrahydroprimapterin inhibits phenylalanine hydroxylase. |Thony et al. (1998) reported 6 patients with mild hyperphenylalaninemia on neonatal screening who were found to have increased serum and urinary 7-biopterin. Ferre et al. (2014) reported follow-up of 1 of the patients (BIODEF 272) reported by Thony et al. (1998), and noted that he had developed nonautoimmune diabetes mellitus in his late teens. He was initially treated with insulin, but was later managed well on oral agents. The patient also had hypomagnesemia and hypermagnesuria. |Thony et al. (1998) reported 4 unrelated children with HPABH4D confirmed by genetic analysis. Three patients were detected by neonatal screening, whereas 1 had normal neonatal screening but developed hyperphenylalaninemia at age 1 month. All patients also showed increased urinary 7-biopterin levels. Treatment of 2 patients with BH4 resulted in decreased phenylalanine levels. All patients had normal psychomotor development between ages 2 and 6 years. Ferre et al. (2014) reported follow-up of 2 of the patients (BIODEF 329 and BIODEF 319) reported by Thony et al. (1998). One had hypomagnesemia and hypermagnesuria but did not develop diabetes mellitus, whereas the other had borderline hypomagnesemia and developed nonautoimmune diabetes mellitus at age 16 years. |Simaite et al. (2014) reported a girl from a consanguineous Turkish family who developed nonautoimmune diabetes mellitus at age 14 years. Linkage analysis and whole-genome sequencing identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the PCBD1 gene in this patient, consistent with a diagnosis of HPABH4D. However, the patient had no history of hyperphenylalaninemia, even as a newborn. By reevaluation of patients with neonatal hyperphenylalaninemia caused by PCBD1 mutations who were included in a database, they found that 3 of 7 children from 6 families developed antibody-negative diabetes mellitus with normal pancreatic morphology during puberty. Two of the 7 patients were younger than 5 years of age. Several of these patients had previously been reported by Thony et al. (1998) and Thony et al. (1998). The patients showed a good response to oral sulfonylureas or glinides. Eight family members in 4 families developed type 2 diabetes as adults; heterozygous PCBD1 mutations were confirmed in 4 of these individuals, all of whom were obese or overweight. No heterozygous mutation carriers with a normal body mass index developed type 2 diabetes. Simaite et al. (2014) suggested that patients with biallelic PCBD1 mutations be monitored for early-onset diabetes, and that even heterozygous PCBD1 mutations may increase susceptibility to type 2 diabetes when combined with other risk factors. |
164050::The PNP gene encodes purine nucleoside phosphorylase (EC 2.4.2.1), an enzyme that catalyzes the reversible phosphorolysis of the purine nucleosides and deoxynucleosides inosine, guanosine, deoxyinosine, and deoxyguanosine (Williams et al., 1984). |
610090::pyridoxamine 5-prime-phosphate oxidase deficiency (PNPOD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the PNPO gene (603287) on chromosome 17q21.|PNPOD is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism resulting in vitamin B6 deficiency that manifests as neonatal-onset severe seizures and subsequent encephalopathy. Patients with PNPO mutations tend to respond better to treatment with pyridoxal 5-prime phosphate (PLP) than with pyridoxine (summary by Plecko et al., 2014). |Brautigam et al. (2002) described twins, born of first-cousin parents, who were born at 29 weeks' gestation and suffered from birth from severe convulsions, myoclonus, rotatory eye movements, sudden clonic contractions, burst suppression electroencephalogram (EEG), hypoglycemia, and acidosis. The patients showed an improvement of the clonic contractions with vitamin B6 supplementation, but died in the third week of life. Biochemical analysis of cerebrospinal fluid and urine suggested aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) deficiency (608643), but molecular analysis excluded genetic defect in the AADC gene (107930). Brautigam et al. (2002) suggested that the epileptic encephalopathy in the twins was in the pathway of vitamin B6 metabolism. |Clayton et al. (2003) presented a boy born at 35 weeks' gestation by cesarean section for fetal distress. His consanguineous parents were of East African Asian origin. Seizures commenced on day 1 and rapidly progressed to status epilepticus. Electroencephalogram showed severe generalized burst suppression. Biochemistry was suggestive of reduced AADC activity; seizures responded dramatically to pyridoxal phosphate (PLP). |In a study of 5 patients, including those of Brautigam et al. (2002) and Clayton et al. (2003), with PNPO deficiency, Mills et al. (2005) reviewed the phenotype. All patients were born prematurely and all but one had low Apgar scores and/or required intubation. Early acidosis was also common. Thus, PNPO deficiency must enter the differential diagnosis of hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy in a prematurely born infant. Seizures commenced on the first day of life, with EEG showing a burst suppression pattern. Biochemical abnormalities in CSF and urine were as for AADC deficiency with the additional features of raised glycine (in all 5), threonine (4 of 5), taurine (4 of 5), histidine (all 5), and low arginine (3 of 5). |Ruiz et al. (2008) reported a male infant with PNPO deficiency. The mother reported repetitive fetal rhythmic movements 2 weeks before delivery, thought to be related to seizures. At birth he had a faltering cry, hypersalivation with orobuccal rhythmic movements accompanied by myoclonus and marked hyperexcitability requiring intubation and ventilation. EEG showed severe myoclonic epilepsy. Brain imaging at 23, 25, and 35 days showed progressive hypomyelination and global atrophy. Laboratory studies showed anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and coagulopathy. Analysis of urinary organic acids, plasma amino acids, and CSF neurotransmitters suggested PNPO deficiency. He died of multiorgan failure due to uncontrollable fungal infection at 48 days of life. Genetic analysis identified a homozygous mutation in the PNPO gene (603287.0004). Prenatal diagnosis using chorionic villus sampling in a subsequent pregnancy identified the same homozygous mutation in the fetus. |Plecko et al. (2014) reported 11 children from 7 families with PNPOD, confirmed by genetic analysis, who had a complete or partial response to pyridoxine treatment. All patients presented in the neonatal period with recurrent myoclonic and tonic jerks accompanied by rolling eye movements and desaturation. EEG showed burst-suppression patterns and/or discontinuous tracings. Ten of 11 patients had pyridoxine administration in the first week of life, and 1 had pyridoxine treatment at age 6 weeks. Pyridoxine led to prompt cessation of seizures in 4 patients, delayed seizure reduction in 2, initial EEG improvement only in 2, and no effect in 2, although 1 of these last patients had remission after subsequent treatment with pyridoxine. Two patients developed status epilepticus after pyridoxine was replaced with PLP. Breakthrough seizures while on pyridoxine were observed in 5 of 9 living patients. Five patients had a favorable overall outcome, 2 had global developmental delay, 2 had severe neurologic sequelae, and 2 died in the absence of continuous pyridoxine treatment. |Ware et al. (2014) reported 2 unrelated boys with PNPOD. Both developed multifocal myoclonic seizures on the first day of life. One of the boys showed hemiclonic seizures, hypertonia, mild encephalopathy, and high-pitched cry until pyridoxine therapy was added on day 7 of life. Breakthrough seizures occurred whenever pyridoxine doses were missed. At age 4 years, the patient had autism spectrum disorder. EEG showed centrotemporal spikes with rare generalized spike-wave bursts. Sequencing of the ALDH7A1 gene was normal, and a trial of monotherapy with pyridoxal 5-prime phosphate (PLP) was commenced, but seizures recurred. After a pathogenic mutation in the PNPO gene was found, the patient had combination therapy with both pyridoxine and PLP, with subsequent reduction of the pyridoxine. At age 7, the patient took only PLP and experienced no significant additional seizures. The second patient had a good initial and subsequent response to monotherapy with high-dose PLP beginning in infancy. At age 21 months, he had moderate global developmental delay and hemiparesis. The report indicated that some patients with PNPOD can respond to pyridoxine treatment. |
266100::pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy (EPD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ALDH7A1 gene (107323) on chromosome 5q23.|Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy, characterized by a combination of various seizure types, usually occurs in the first hours of life and is unresponsive to standard anticonvulsants, responding only to immediate administration of pyridoxine hydrochloride. The dependence is permanent, and the interruption of daily pyridoxine supplementation leads to the recurrence of seizures. Some patients show developmental delay. The prevalence is estimated at 1 in 400,000 to 700,000 (Bennett et al., 2005). |Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy was first described by Hunt et al. (1954). Waldinger (1964) described 3 sibs of Italian ancestry in whom pyridoxine dependency was manifest by convulsions at birth. Four previously reported sibships with more than 1 affected sib were referred to. Bejsovec et al. (1967) described 3 sibs with intrauterine convulsions. The first 2 (females) died in status epilepticus. The third was shown to have pyridoxine dependency. Thus, this is one form of 'convulsive disorder, familial, with prenatal or early onset' (217200). |Goutieres and Aicardi (1985) reported 3 patients with atypical pyridoxine-dependent seizures. Each had either late onset of convulsions or seizure-free intervals of up to several months' duration without B6 supplementation. The findings, together with those in 9 previously reported cases, led the authors to urge a trial of pyridoxine in all cases of seizure disorders with onset before 18 months of age, regardless of type. Autosomal recessive inheritance was supported by parental consanguinity in the case of an affected female infant whose elder brother died at 8 months of age of unexplained status epilepticus. |Bennett et al. (2005) reported 6 Caucasian North American families with pyridoxine-dependent seizures. Two of the families had been reported by Battaglioli et al. (2000). |Mills et al. (2006) reported 13 patients from 8 unrelated families with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy. Seizures usually started on the first day of life, but in 1 case were delayed until 3 weeks of age. Clonic seizures, generalized tonic seizures, and myoclonic jerks were all observed. Seizures were resistant to the usual anticonvulsant drugs in all but 1 case, but stopped completely and immediately upon treatment with pyridoxine. Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid levels of pipecolic acid were increased. Despite early and good control of seizures, all but 1 child showed developmental delay, ranging from mild to severe, with psychomotor difficulties and speech delay. Other features in the neonatal period included respiratory distress, acidosis, and abdominal distention and vomiting. The parents in 6 of the families were consanguineous; the families were of Dutch, Austrian, Bosnian, Turkish, Arabic, and Asian origin. |
266150::pyruvate carboxylase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the pyruvate carboxylase gene (PC; 608786) on chromosome 11q13.|PC deficiency may be categorized into 3 phenotypic subgroups. Patients from North America ('group A') have lactic acidemia and psychomotor retardation, whereas those from France and the United Kingdom ('group B') have a more complex biochemical phenotype with increased serum lactate, ammonia, citrulline, and lysine, as well as an intracellular redox disturbance in which the cytosolic compartment is more reduced and the mitochondrial compartment is more oxidized. Patients in group B have decreased survival compared to group A, and usually do not survive beyond 3 months of age (Robinson et al., 1987). Group C is relatively benign. |Tada et al. (1969) reported a family in which 2 sisters were presumably affected with the same physical and mental retardation. The proband had elevated serum alanine and pyruvate, normal SGPT and liver pyruvate decarboxylase activities, but decreased activity of pyruvate carboxylase. Hyperalaninemia was likely secondary to the increased level of pyruvate. |Delvin et al. (1972) noted that 2 forms of pyruvate carboxylase exist in liver, one with a high Km and the other with a low Km for pyruvate. They reported a patient with abnormality of gluconeogenesis and elevated plasma levels of pyruvate, lactate, and alanine in which the low Km enzyme was deficient.|Atkin et al. (1979) reported a child with lactic acidosis, severe mental and developmental retardation, and proximal renal acidosis. Laboratory studies showed severe hepatic, renal cortical, and cerebral deficiencies of pyruvate carboxylase activity. Postmortem neuropathologic examination revealed no signs of Leigh syndrome (256000), but developmental and degenerative lesions were observed. Oizumi et al. (1983) reported a patient with PC deficiency associated with renal tubular acidosis and cystinuria. |Haworth et al. (1981) reported 2 unrelated Canadian Indian infants with PC deficiency. Both presented in infancy with metabolic acidosis. Laboratory findings included increased plasma lactate, pyruvate, glutamic acid, proline, and alanine, and low PC activity in skin fibroblasts and liver. Both survived until at least 2 years of age with severe mental retardation. |Gilbert et al. (1983) reported a case of Leigh necrotizing encephalopathy due to pyruvate carboxylase deficiency. |Carbone et al. (1998) studied 11 males and 6 females from several Canadian Indian populations. Presentation was at birth in 7, and 1 to 8.5 months in 10. Presenting signs included metabolic acidosis in 10, seizures in 5, respiratory distress in 4, pneumonia in 3, and hypotonia in 3. The clinical course was characterized by frequent lactic acidosis, severe developmental delay, and muscular hypotonia in 17, seizures in 8, hypoglycemia in 4, and other CNS involvement (clonus or athetosis) in 4. Eleven patients died between ages 3 months and 4.75 years; 6 were surviving at ages ranging from 3 months to 19 years. |The second form of PC deficiency, reported particularly from France, presents early with lactic acidosis, but also shows elevated blood levels of ammonia, citrulline, proline, and lysine. In addition, there is an intracellular redox disturbance, with increased lactate/pyruvate and acetoacetate/beta-hydroxybutyrate ratios.|Saudubray et al. (1976) reported 2 familial cases of neonatal congenital lactic acidosis with liver PC deficiency. Disease onset was immediately after birth, characterized by major neurologic symptoms, hyperammonemia, and hyperketonemia. Hyperlactic acidemia was associated with an increased lactate/pyruvate ratio and an increased acetoacetate/beta-hydroxybutyrate ratio. The authors suggested that the unusual metabolic pattern resulted from decreased oxaloacetate synthesis resulting from PC deficiency and impaired oxaloacetate-dependent mitochondrial redox shuttles. The disease course was rapidly fatal. Coude et al. (1981) and Bartlett et al. (1984) also reported patients with the group B type of PC deficiency. |Robinson et al. (1984) reported 8 patients from 7 families from Canada with pyruvate carboxylase deficiency. Five were of full Amerindian descent, 2 were unrelated Caucasians, and 1 was the offspring of related Egyptian parents. All presented from soon after birth to age 5 months with chronic metabolic acidosis, and 4 had at least 1 episode of hypoglycemia. Six patients died by age 2 years (range 10 days to 2 years), and the 2 living patients were mentally and physically retarded. Using (3)H-biotin labeling and (35)S-streptavidin to detect biotin-containing proteins, and immunodetection with PC antibodies, Robinson et al. (1984) distinguished 2 groups of patients: group 'A' synthesized PC subunits with a normal molecular mass and recognized by antibodies against PC, but showed very little enzymatic activity, (termed CRM(+ve) or type I), whereas group 'B' had no detectable PC subunits and no protein recognized by the antibody (termed CRM(-ve), or type II). The 2 patients with CRM(-ve) results, the Egyptian patient and 1 of the Caucasian patients, had additional biochemical features, including hyperammonemia, citrullinemia, lysinemia, and altered redox states (in 1 patient) similar to the features of patients reported in France. These 2 patients also died early (10 days and 7 weeks) and had hepatomegaly due to excessive fat storage. Robinson et al. (1984) concluded that the 2 subtle types of PC deficiency result from 2 different mutations in the PC gene, 1 that synthesizes an inactive protein and 1 that results in lack of protein expression. |In a follow-up study of cultured skin fibroblasts from 16 patients with either French or American PC deficiency, Robinson et al. (1987) confirmed that the North American cases are associated with the presence of a mature biotin-containing protein of the correct molecular weight. Three families with the French presentation had absence of immunoreactive PC protein and PC mRNA; however, another 3 families with the French presentation had evidence of protein production as well as PC mRNA. Robinson et al. (1987) concluded that when a PC enzyme is produced in French cases, it has no activity. |Pineda et al. (1995) reported an infant with what they termed the 'French' type of pyruvate carboxylase deficiency, with somewhat less severity. The initial neonatal symptoms were respiratory distress, severe metabolic acidosis, and a tendency to hypoglycemia. At age 6 months, he presented with acute neurologic symptoms, lactic acidosis, and hyperammonemia, and died of pneumonia, cardiac failure, and renal insufficiency. Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency was confirmed by enzymatic studies. Postmortem analysis showed periventricular cysts and diffuse hypomyelination. |Brun et al. (1999) reported brother and sister with the severe form of PC deficiency. Both had macrocephaly and severe ischemia-like brain lesions at birth and died in the first week of life with intractable lactic acidemia. In the girl, increased head circumference and periventricular leukomalacia were detected on fetal ultrasonography at 29.4 weeks of gestation. PC activity in cultured skin fibroblasts was less than 2% of control. The lesions were detected at a time of maximal periventricular metabolic demand. Brun et al. (1999) postulated that energy deprivation induced by PC deficiency impairs astrocytic buffering capacity against excitotoxic insult and compromises normal microvascular morphogenesis and autoregulation, both mechanisms leading to cystic degeneration of the periventricular white matter. The authors noted that discovery of cystic periventricular leukomalacia on cerebral ultrasound at birth in a newborn presenting with primary lactic acidemia is highly suggestive of PC deficiency. |Van Coster et al. (1991) reported a 7-year-old girl with metabolic and biochemical features of the North American type of PC deficiency who had a benign disease course with preservation of motor and mental abilities. She had several episodes of metabolic acidosis with elevated lactate, pyruvate, alanine, beta-hydroxybutyrate, acetoacetate, lysine, and proline values, which were well-managed by rehydration and bicarbonate therapy. PC activity was 1.8% of normal, and she was CRM(+ve). The authors commented on the unique phenotypic expression in this patient. |Schiff et al. (2006) reported a patient with atypical PC deficiency and long survival. He presented at 3 days of age with acute ketoacidosis, tachypnea, and hypotonia. Laboratory studies showed lactacidemia with normal plasma amino acids and ammonia. After successful treatment, he was discharged with an increased lactate-to-pyruvate ratio and avoidance of fasting was advised. During the first 2 years of life, he had mild psychomotor delay and failure to thrive with intermittent acute decompensation. PC activity in cultured skin fibroblasts was severely decreased, leading to the correct diagnosis. Brain MRI at age 18 months showed bilateral high signal intensities in frontoparietal subcortical white matter. At the time of the report, he was 9 years old and showed mild and global psychomotor delay with dysarthria and dysgraphia. Treatment included biotin, L-carnitine, sodium bicarbonate, sodium citrate, and avoidance of fasting. Schiff et al. (2006) noted that relatively long survival into childhood is not a frequent finding for this usually very severe disease.|
312170::pyruvate dehydrogenase E1-alpha deficiency (PDHAD) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding the E1-alpha polypeptide (PDHA1; 300502) of the pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) complex, which maps to chromosome Xp22.|Genetic defects in the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex are one of the most common causes of primary lactic acidosis in children. Most cases are caused by mutation in the E1-alpha subunit gene on the X chromosome. X-linked PDH deficiency is one of the few X-linked diseases in which a high proportion of heterozygous females manifest severe symptoms. The clinical spectrum of PDH deficiency is broad, ranging from fatal lactic acidosis in the newborn to chronic neurologic dysfunction with structural abnormalities in the central nervous system without systemic acidosis (Robinson et al., 1987; Brown et al., 1994). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency|PDH deficiency can also be caused by mutation in other subunits of the PDH complex, including a form (PDHXD; 245349) caused by mutation in the component X gene (PDHX; 608769) on chromosome 11p13; a form (PDHBD; 614111) caused by mutation in the PDHB gene (179060) on chromosome 3p14; a form (PDHDD; 245348) caused by mutation in the DLAT gene (608770) on chromosome 11q23; a form (PDHPD; 608782) caused by mutation in the PDP1 gene (605993) on chromosome 8q22; and a form (PDHLD; 614462) caused by mutation in the LIAS gene (607031) on chromosome 4p14.|In general, there are 2 major presentations of PDH deficiency, metabolic and neurologic, which occur at equal frequency. The metabolic form presents as severe lactic acidosis in the newborn period, usually leading to death. Patients with the neurologic presentation are hypotonic and lethargic, and develop seizures, mental retardation, and spasticity. They often have structural abnormalities in the central nervous system with minimal or absent metabolic abnormalities. Between these 2 extremes, there is a continuous spectrum of intermediate forms characterized by intermittent episodes of lactic acidosis associated with cerebellar ataxia. Many patients fit into the category of Leigh syndrome (256000) (Brown et al., 1994). |Blass et al. (1970) reported deficiency of pyruvate decarboxylase in an 8-year-old boy who had suffered 2 to 6 episodes of ataxia each year since the age of 16 months. Most attacks followed nonspecific febrile illness or other stresses. Choreoathetosis and cerebellar ataxia were present during the episodes, with mild clumsiness between episodes. Laboratory studies showed increased blood pyruvic acid, increased blood alanine, and a decreased activity of pyruvate decarboxylase (20% of normal). The father's fibroblasts and leukocytes showed partially defective pyruvate decarboxylase, and values in the mother were at the lower limit of normal. The patient of Blass et al. (1970) was reminiscent of a boy reported by Lonsdale et al. (1969) with intermittent ataxia and choreoathetosis precipitated by acute infections. Both patients showed conspicuous abnormalities of eye movement as in Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome (277730). Thiamine in large doses appeared to benefit Lonsdale's patient. |Farrell et al. (1975) reported a 6-month-old infant with fatal congenital lactic acidosis and deficiency of pyruvate decarboxylase. Stromme et al. (1976) reported an infant with increased blood lactate, alanine, and serine. Fibroblasts cultured from skin showed a severe decrease in activity of the PDH complex (8% of normal) and the first enzyme of the complex (4% of normal). |Livingstone et al. (1984) described a family in which 5 males in 3 sibships had intermittent cerebellar ataxia and biochemical features of abnormal pyruvate metabolism. The patients were related through 3 presumed carrier females. Postmortem examination of 1 of the affected males, who died at age 50, showed neuropathologic findings suggestive of Leigh syndrome. There was cerebellar degeneration with a distribution suggestive of olivopontocerebellar atrophy, but the histologic appearance in tissues around the third ventricle and aqueduct was similar to those seen in Wernicke encephalopathy and in Leigh syndrome. There was no response to administration of thiamine. One of the affected males had recurrent episodes of ataxia and dysarthria beginning at the age of 3 years. Each attack lasted from 2 to 12 days and occurred every 3 to 4 months. Episodes were less severe and less frequent after the age of 14 years, and he was able to hold down a steady job as a laborer. In a teenaged affected male, elevated levels of fasting serum lactate and pyruvate were noted during recovery from a typical attack. At 10 years of age, his IQ was 65. One male died of pneumonia at the age of 5 years after recurrent attacks of hyperventilation and unsteadiness from the age of 3 years. Livingstone et al. (1984) observed at least a temporary favorable response to acetazolamide, and suggested that the basic defect might reside in the gene for the E1-alpha component of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. |Robinson and Sherwood (1984) found that 18 of 23 patients with congenital lactic acidemia had a defect in the first component of the PDH complex. Ten cases had facial dysmorphism consisting of a narrow head, wide nasal bridge and flared nostrils, and microcephaly. Two patients had agenesis of the corpus callosum. In a study of 30 patients with defect in the PDH complex E1 component Robinson et al. (1987) found that residual activity of the PDH complex ranged from 1.6% to 69.5% of controls. Seven patients died before 6 months of age, and another 5 before 2 years of age. Sixteen of the surviving patients and the 5 who died before age 2 had psychomotor retardation, and 17 children had structural damage of the central nervous system, ranging from cerebral atrophy to cystic lesions in the cortex, basal ganglia, and brainstem resembling Leigh syndrome. |Evans (1984) reported episodic weakness in pyruvate decarboxylase deficiency. Brown et al. (1988) reported 6 patients with early onset of neurologic symptoms, gross cerebral changes, and increased levels of pyruvate and lactate in cerebrospinal fluid. Although the patients appeared to have a defect in pyruvate metabolism as evidenced by deficient pyruvate dehydrogenase activity in cultured fibroblasts, systemic acidosis was not a problem clinically and blood pyruvate and lactate concentrations were only slightly raised. Brown et al. (1988) termed this form of the disorder 'cerebral' lactic acidosis. |Okajima et al. (2006) reported a 7-year-old boy with E1-alpha deficiency resulting from somatic mosaicism for a splice site mutation in the PDHA1 gene. The diagnosis was difficult due to the relatively mild and nonspecific features. He presented at age 6 months with moderately delayed motor development and was subsequently found to have intermittent elevated blood lactate on several occasions. Other biochemical studies and brain MRI were normal. At 18 months, he had mild microcephaly, mild global developmental delay, central hypotonia, and mild spasticity of the lower extremities. He spoke his first words at 14 months and walked at 24 months. Repeat measurements showed increased CSF lactate and pyruvate, and the correct diagnosis was made. At age 6 years, he had cognitive impairment, showed some repetitive automatisms, poor attention span, hyperactivity, and mild hypotonia. Total PDC activity was significantly decreased in fibroblasts and skeletal muscle, but normal in lymphocytes. Detailed genetic, biochemical, and Western blot analysis of buccal cells, hair, lymphoblasts, and fibroblasts showed a mixed species of mutant and normal E1-alpha, with corresponding variable activity and immunoreactivity, all consistent with somatic mosaicism. |De Meirleir et al. (1998) reported a 3-year-old boy and a younger sister with E1-alpha deficiency caused by mutation in the PDHA1 gene (300502.0019). The boy showed general hypotonia during development, and from the age of 3 months had several episodes of ptosis lasting 1 to 2 days. These episodes became more frequent between 15 and 17 months of age and were associated with swallowing disturbances and hypotonia, paralysis of lateral gaze, and tachypnea. Metabolic acidosis was found. He had 2 episodes of acute ataxia with weakness between the ages 2 and 3 years. MRI of the brain demonstrated bilateral pallidal lesions and demyelinating pons lesions. The more severely affected younger sister presented from birth with severe hypotonia and dysmorphia and by the age of 10 months developed spastic quadriplegia with areflexia and severe mental retardation. |Naito et al. (1997) reported a boy with PDHAD born at term to healthy, consanguineous parents. At age 4 months, he showed developmental delay. He had increased blood lactate and pyruvate as well as basal ganglia lesions on MRI, consistent with Leigh syndrome. His older brother had shown a similar disorder, with hypotonia, mental retardation, lactic acidemia, and basal ganglia lesions. The brothers died at ages 6 and 4 years from respiratory failure. The index patient showed some clinical improvement with thiamine therapy. |Dahl et al. (1992) described 3 female patients with pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency due to mutation in the PDHA1 gene (300502.0009). Two of the patients demonstrated typical features of the disorder with severe neurologic dysfunction, degenerative changes, and developmental anomalies in the brain, together with variable lactic acidosis. Both had manifestations from early after birth; 1 died at 5 months and the other at 17 years. The third patient, an adult who was the mother of the 17-year-old, had delayed development. She did not walk until 4 years of age and could not spell until she was 20. She had epilepsy which was reasonably controlled with medication. The mother had 4 brothers, all of normal intelligence. Dahl et al. (1992) suggested that she may have been a mosaic for an early somatic mutation. |Matthews et al. (1994) reported 2 female patients with early-onset encephalopathy and lactic acidosis who had PDH activity in the normal range. One had mild dysmorphic features, antimongoloid slant of the eyes, a broad philtrum, and microcephaly. There was generalized brain atrophy, ventriculomegaly, and a frontoparietal cystic lesion. The X-inactivation pattern in the fibroblasts was 80 to 20. This was the third child of consanguineous parents; a previous male infant had died with severe developmental delay and lactic acidosis. The second patient was hypotonic with marked developmental delay, cerebral atrophy, and extensor infantile spasms at 2 months of age. X-inactivation pattern was 70 to 30. The authors noted that PDH activity was well within the normal range in both girls and the diagnosis was only possible by DNA studies, which identified mutations in the PDHA1 gene (300502.0015; 300502.0016). |Shevell et al. (1994) described 3 infant girls with PDH complex deficiency. MRI revealed hypoplasia, particularly of the posterior part of the corpus callosum, as well as global white matter loss without heterotopias. Phosphorus magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) of muscle revealed abnormally low phosphorylation potentials. Proton MRS of the brain demonstrated a large increase in signals of lactic acid and decrease of the relative signal intensity of N-acetylaspartate. The authors proposed that cerebral dysgenesis and cerebral lactic acidemia should suggest PDH complex deficiency. |Lissens et al. (1999) reported 2 unrelated girls with PDH deficiency caused by 2 different mutations in the PDHA1 gene (300502.0020; 300502.0021). Both patients had spastic quadriplegia, severe mental retardation, and microcephaly. One patient presented at the age of 5 months with infantile spasms. Lactate levels in blood and cerebrospinal fluid were increased, with a normal lactate/pyruvate ratio. Brain MRI at the age of 13 years revealed asymmetric irregular ventricular enlargement, abnormally steep angle of the Sylvian fissures, normal myelination, an intact corpus callosum, and a normal-sized cerebellum. In the second patient, MRI of the brain showed cortical atrophy of both cerebral hemispheres and cerebellum, a partial agenesis of the corpus callosum, and dilatation of the lateral and third ventricles. Both patients had low PDH activity, but normal amounts of all subunits on Western blotting. Blood lactate and pyruvate levels were increased, with a normal lactate/pyruvate ratio. X-inactivation studies in fibroblast DNA showed that the second patient had an almost completely skewed inactivation pattern. |
608782::pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase deficiency is caused by homozygous mutation in the PDP1 gene (605993) on chromosome 8q22.For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) deficiency, see 312170.|Robinson and Sherwood (1975) reported a male infant who presented on the first day of life with lactic acidosis and died at age 6 months. Activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex in tissue homogenates preincubated with ATP was reduced by 60 to 75% in liver of the patient and controls because of the inactivation of the enzyme by pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase (see, e.g., PDK1, 602524). Addition of calcium and magnesium to the inactivated enzyme caused a prompt return of the activity to normal in controls, but not in the patient's cells. Robinson and Sherwood (1975) concluded that the defect in the patient, which was apparent in muscle and liver but not in brain, was caused by a markedly reduced activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase (605993). |Robinson (2001) suggested that the patients reported by Sorbi and Blass (1982) and DeVivo et al. (1979) had pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase deficiency. |Ito et al. (1992) provided follow-up on 3 patients reported by Naito et al. (1988) with disorders of pyruvate metabolism. Clinical features included mental and developmental retardation beginning in infancy, muscle hypotonia, seizures, and lactic acidosis. Two patients had CT findings consistent with Leigh syndrome (256000). |Maj et al. (2005) reported 2 brothers, born of consanguineous parents, who presented with neonatal hypotonia, elevated lactate, and less than 25% native pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHc) activity in skin fibroblasts compared with controls. |Cameron et al. (2009) reported a female infant, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, with genetically confirmed pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase deficiency. She had mild truncal hypotonia, and brain MRI showed increased T2 signal in the posterior white matter consistent with edema, without diffusion restriction. There was normal myelination, no structural brain lesion, and the brain stem appeared normal. After diagnosis and treatment, she remained clinically stable and showed signs of appropriate developmental progression, including starting to sit, responding to her name, and speaking some words. At 6 months of age, the patient developed acute respiratory distress and died; no autopsy was performed. |
266500::classic Refsum disease is caused by mutation in the gene encoding phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase (PHYH, or PAHX; 602026) on chromosome 10.|Refsum disease is an autosomal recessive inborn error of lipid metabolism classically characterized by a tetrad of clinical abnormalities: retinitis pigmentosa, peripheral neuropathy, cerebellar ataxia, and elevated protein levels in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) without an increase in the number of cells. However, not all patients show all these features. All patients have accumulation of an unusual branched-chain fatty acid, phytanic acid, in blood and tissues. Other variable features include cardiac dysfunction, nerve deafness, ichthyosis, and multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (review by Skjeldal et al., 1987). |Increased levels of phytanic acid can also be found in peroxisomal biogenesis disorders; see Zellweger syndrome (see 214100) (Skjeldal et al., 1987). |Infantile Refsum disease (see PBD1B, 601539) is a distinct disorder with a different phenotype and genetic basis.|A phenotype clinically indistinguishable from that of classic Refsum disease (PBD9B; 614879), but with a different biochemical profile, can be caused by mutation in the gene encoding peroxin-7 (PEX7; 601757) on chromosome 6q.|Refsum (1946) first described this disorder and noted the hereditary aspect.|Skjeldal et al. (1987) reported the clinical features of 17 patients with Refsum disease. Although onset of symptoms was reportedly insidious, they generally were reported to occur late in the first decade through the third decade of life. All patients had retinitis pigmentosa with night blindness and constriction of the visual fields, and many patients had cataracts. All had some sign of polyneuropathy, most commonly impaired reflexes, and most patients also had sensory disturbances and limb paresis or atrophy. Only 5 patients had clear cerebellar ataxia. Other common features included anosmia and progressive hearing loss. Skin changes, cardiac abnormalities, and skeletal manifestations were less common. Serum phytanic acid was increased in those who had not been treated by diet, and phytanic acid oxidase activity in fibroblasts was very low. |Leys et al. (1989) described 2 brothers who presented in their twenties with severe heart failure as the predominant clinical manifestation of Refsum disease. Both of them had retinitis pigmentosa with lack of ERG response, miosis, anosmia, and bilateral shortening of the fourth metatarsals, but no cataracts or deafness. One of them had mild bilateral ptosis. |
179800::autosomal dominant distal renal tubular acidosis is caused by heterozygous mutation in the SLC4A1 gene (109270) on chromosome 17q21.|Randall and Targgart (1961) observed renal tubular acidosis in members of several successive generations. All affected members showed both acidosis and nephrocalcinosis. Randall (1967) provided follow-up of this family. The pedigree included 4 instances of male-to-male transmission. The features were nephrocalcinosis, fixed urinary specific gravity, fixed urinary pH of about 5.0, high serum chloride, low serum bicarbonate, osteomalacia, and hypocalcemia. Alkalinization was effective therapy. |Seedat (1968) observed 18 affected persons in 3 generations. In the well-studied family reported by Gyory and Edwards (1968), 10 persons were affected by test, 3 others were (by genealogic connections) presumably affected and 2 others were reportedly affected. Male-to-male transmission occurred. Richards and Wrong (1972) described familial renal tubular acidosis in a mother and her 3 children. |Morris (1970) suggested that at least 3 types of renal tubular acidosis could be recognized: a classic type (RTA I), in which the bicarbonate threshold is normal and the defect is primarily in the distal tubule; a proximal type (RTA II, see 604278), in which the bicarbonate threshold is normal and the defect is primarily in the proximal tubule; and a 'dislocation,' or bicarbonate-wasting, type (RTA III, see 267200).|A phenocopy of the genetic disorder is produced by amphotericin B (McCurdy et al., 1968). |Buckalew et al. (1974) suggested that there are 2 autosomal dominant forms of RTA, one with hypercalciuria and one without. Hamed et al. (1979) presented studies of a large kindred that appeared to indicate that absorptive hypercalciuria is an autosomal dominant trait with complete penetrance and variable expressivity, that can lead to renal tubular acidosis and nephrocalcinosis. Buckalew et al. (1974) had also shown in 1 family that hypercalciuria preceded RTA. |Chaabani et al. (1994) reported a family in which 28 members had primary RTA I. In this large family, as well as in 2 other families with a small number of affected individuals, some of the affected members were asymptomatic. Clinical abnormalities commonly associated with RTA I, such as nephrocalcinosis and growth retardation, appeared only in 3 cases among offspring when both parents were affected. Linkage studies excluded close linkage to ABO, MNS, GM, and RH. Chaabani et al. (1994) suggested that theirs was the first reported large family with primary RTA I. Other families, such as those reported by Buckalew et al. (1974) and Hamed et al. (1979), had RTA I secondary to hereditary hypercalciuria. |In 2 unrelated males with primary renal tubular acidosis, Kondo et al. (1978) found an inactive form of carbonic anhydrase B (CA2; 611492) in red cells. Although antigenically and electrophoretically normal, it showed decreased zinc binding. The zinc contained in isolated enzyme was reduced and enzyme activity in hemolysates was restored by addition of zinc chloride. One mother had depressed CA-B, but no increase in specific activity was observed after addition of zinc. The authors estimated that 41 and 62% of CA-B was of mutant type in their 2 cases and apparently favored dominant inheritance. RTA of prominently distal type associated with osteopetrosis (259730) has been found to have a defect in CA2. |Bruce et al. (1997) studied 4 families with distal RTA. Most of the patients presented clinically with renal stones, and the majority had nephrocalcinosis. One patient had rickets when initially seen at age 10 years and developed osteomalacia at the age of 32 after she stopped taking alkali therapy, but no other patient had bone disease. Eight patients were not acidotic when first seen, and were diagnosed as 'incomplete' dominant RTA because they were unable to excrete a urine more acid than pH 5.3 after oral acute ammonium chloride challenge. Compared with acidotic cases, these patients tended to be younger, with lower plasma creatinines, better preservation of urinary concentrating ability, and less (or no) nephrocalcinosis; over a 10-year period, 2 of the patients spontaneously developed acidosis. Acidotic patients were treated with oral alkalis, usually 6 gm of sodium bicarbonate daily, and had normal acid-base status at the time of the study; nonacidotic patients were not treated. |
604278::autosomal recessive proximal renal tubular acidosis with ocular abnormalities and mental retardation is caused by homozygous mutation in the SLC4A4 gene (603345) on chromosome 4q13.|Winsnes et al. (1979) reported the cases of 2 brothers with severe hyperchloremic acidosis, a maximum tubular capacity for bicarbonate reabsorption about half normal, growth retardation, mental retardation, nystagmus, cataract, corneal opacities, glaucoma, and defects in the enamel of the permanent teeth. Red cells showed increased osmotic resistance. The possibility of a generalized membrane defect was raised. Also, similarities to Lowe syndrome (309000) were pointed out.|Braverman and Snyder (1987) identified a 5-year-old male who presented with band keratopathy as the first sign of proximal renal tubular acidosis.|Igarashi et al. (1994) described a female who had presented at the age of 16 years with persistent proximal renal tubular acidosis, mental retardation, band keratopathy, cataracts, glaucoma, and short stature. She had an abnormally low renal threshold for bicarbonate reabsorption. |
312750::Rett syndrome (RTT) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding methyl-CpG-binding protein-2 (MECP2; 300005) on chromosome Xq28.See also the congenital variant of Rett syndrome (613454), which is caused by mutation in the FOXG1 gene (164874) on chromosome 14q13.|Rett syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder that occurs almost exclusively in females. It is characterized by arrested development between 6 and 18 months of age, regression of acquired skills, loss of speech, stereotypic movements (classically of the hands), microcephaly, seizures, and mental retardation. Rarely, classically affected males with somatic mosaicism or an extra X chromosome have been described (Moog et al., 2003). |Rett (1966, 1977), a Viennese pediatrician, first described Rett syndrome after observing 2 girls who exhibited the same unusual behavior who happened to be seated next to each other in the waiting room. |Hagberg et al. (1983) described 35 patients, all girls from 3 countries (France, Portugal, and Sweden), with a uniform and striking, progressive encephalopathy. After normal development up to the age of 7 to 18 months, developmental stagnation occurred, followed by rapid deterioration of high brain functions. Within 1.5 years, this deterioration progressed to severe dementia, autism, loss of purposeful use of the hands, jerky truncal ataxia, and 'acquired' microcephaly. Thereafter, a period of apparent stability lasted for decades. Additional neurologic abnormalities intervened insidiously, mainly spastic paraparesis, vasomotor disturbances of the lower limbs, and epilepsy. |Bruck et al. (1991) described a set of monozygotic female twins with Rett syndrome. The authors noted that normal early development has generally been insisted on as an essential criterion for the diagnosis; however, twin 1 was considered to be abnormal from birth, while delay was not suspected in twin 2 until she was about 1 year old. Some regression occurred during the second year in both twins, who at age 4 years were clinically indistinguishable. |A striking deceleration of growth has been found across all measurements in 85 to 94% of girls with Rett syndrome and may provide the earliest clinical indication of this disorder. Motil et al. (1994) studied dietary intake and energy production in 9 Rett syndrome girls, comparing them to 7 healthy controls. Metabolic rate while sleeping was 23% lower in Rett syndrome girls than in controls, while metabolic rates during waking hours did not differ between the 2 groups. Dietary intake and fecal fat loss were also the same. The energy balance in girls with Rett syndrome was 55 +/- 43 kcal/kg lean body mass daily; in controls, the balance was 58 +/- 22 kcal/kg lean body mass per day. Motil et al. (1994) speculated that a small difference in energy balance would be sufficient to account for the growth failure in Rett syndrome girls and may explain the greater time that the Rett syndrome girls spent in involuntary motor activity. |Hagberg (1995) reviewed a Swedish series of 170 affected females, aged 2 to 52 years. The well-recognized classic phenotype was found in 75% of cases. Atypical variant forms, mainly more mildly affected mentally retarded girls and adolescent women, were still in a minority, but constituted an expanding cohort. |The presence of metatarsal and metacarpal abnormalities in some patients with Rett syndrome prompted Leonard et al. (1995) to conduct radiologic studies of 17 cases. Short fourth and/or fifth metatarsals were identified in 11 (65%), short fourth and/or fifth metacarpals in 8 of 14 (57%), and reduced bone density in the hands was found in 12 of 14 cases (86%). Leonard et al. (1999) examined hand radiographs of 100 girls with Rett syndrome, representing 73% of the known Australian population of girls with Rett syndrome, aged 20 and under. A metacarpophalangeal pattern profile was established, revealing that the shortest bone was the second metacarpal. Short distal phalanx of the thumb was seen in all age groups and in classic and atypical cases. In girls less than 15 years old, bone age was more advanced in Rett syndrome patients compared with controls (left hand p = 0.03, right hand p = 0.004), but was most advanced in the younger group. Bone age normalized with chronological age. |Miyamoto et al. (1997) described 2 Japanese sisters with classic RTT. The youngest sister, aged 6 years and 6 months, never stood or walked alone, showed severe spasticity, growth retardation, and microcephaly, developed sleep-wake rhythm disturbance from age 4, and seizures from age 5 years. The elder, 7 years and 9 months old at the time of report, walked alone and had mild spasticity, no growth retardation, normal sleep-wakefulness rhythm, and no seizures. The variability in the sisters stood in contrast to that in monozygotic twins with RTT who usually show little clinical difference.|Sirianni et al. (1998) reported 3 affected sisters of a Brazilian family who showed rapid deceleration of head growth with subsequent progressive mental deterioration. Two surviving affected daughters, examined at ages 9 and 5.5 years, showed no purposeful hand movements, but had persistent hand stereotypes and rubbing of the torso. They had significant muscle wasting and inability to walk, and showed spontaneous episodes of hyperventilation while awake. They had a severe attention deficit and no language development, with intellectual and adaptive behavior at the 1- to 6-month level. Although the younger daughter was still able to reach for food, she was without other purposeful hand use. Leonard and Bower (1998) retrospectively studied the neonatal characteristics and early development of Australian girls with Rett syndrome. The mean weight and head circumference of newborn girls later identified as Rett patients was lower than that of the reference Australian population. Girls who had learned to walk had larger heads at birth than those who had not; girls who had never been ambulant had the smallest heads at birth. In 46.5% of girls, parents reported unusual development or behavior in the first 6 months. The authors stated that these results provided evidence that girls with Rett syndrome may not be normal at birth. They further suggested that using normal development in the first 6 months and normal neonatal head circumference as diagnostic criteria may cause missed or delayed diagnoses. |Horska et al. (2009) performed proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) on 40 girls with Rett syndrome with a mean age of 6.1 years. Compared to 12 controls, Rett syndrome patients had a decreased N-acetylaspartate (NAA)/creatinine (Cr) ratio and increased myoinositol/Cr ratio with age (p = 0.03), suggestive of progressive axonal damage and astrocytosis. The mean NAA/Cr ratio was 12.6% lower in RTT patients with seizures compared with those without seizures (p = 0.017), and NAA/Cr ratios decreased with increasing clinical severity score (p = 0.031). The mean glutamate and glutamine/Cr ratio was 36% greater in RTT patients than in controls (p = 0.043), which may have been secondary to increasing glutamate/glutamine cycling at the synaptic level. The findings indicated that Rett syndrome is associated with mild white matter pathology, and suggested that MRS can provide a noninvasive measure of cerebral involvement in RTT. |Renieri et al. (2009) presented a detailed evaluation of 29 patients with Zappella variant, also known as preserved speech variant, Rett syndrome. All 29 patients had mutation in the MECP2 gene, of which 28 were missense (see, e.g., R133C; 312750.0001) or late truncating mutations. There was great variability with respect to language, manual abilities, and somatic features, allowing for further statistical subdivision into low, intermediate, and high functioning. In general, patients with Zappella variant Rett syndrome had less microcephaly, later onset of regression, a tendency to be overweight, better hand use, and better speech acquisition compared to patients with classic Rett syndrome. The majority (76%) of patients with Zappella variant had autistic features. Diagnostic criteria was presented. Renieri et al. (2009) proposed the term 'Zappella variant' rather than 'preserved speech variant' to described milder forms of Rett syndrome because other aspects besides speech are involved. |Adegbola et al. (2009) reported a 10-year-old girl who had slowing of motor skills and hypotonia at age 12 months. She had purposeful hand movements with occasional hand-wringing stereotypes, was morbidly obese, was prone to aggressive outbursts, and had mild autistic features. EEG showed multifocal spike and wave discharges without overt seizures. Full-scale IQ was 70 at age 6 years and 58 at age 8 years. Her father had an IQ of 85, had special schooling, and showed behavioral dyscontrol and hyperactivity in childhood and adolescence. His behavioral difficulties improved with age. Both father and daughter were found to have a mutation in the MECP2 gene (300005.0036), that resulted in decreased, but not absent MECP2 function. The findings were consistent with a hypomorphic MECP2 allele contributing to a neuropsychiatric phenotype in this family. |Coleman (1990) reported a possible case of Rett syndrome in a male, and Philippart (1990) reported 2 such cases. |Schwartzman et al. (1999) described a male patient with Rett syndrome and the 47,XXY karyotype of Klinefelter syndrome. The propositus showed normal development until age 8 months. At that time, he sat without support, played normally, and was able to grasp objects and to put food into his mouth. He had started to say some words comprehensibly. At age 11 months, it was noted that he had lost purposeful hand movements and language skills. He also began to show regression in social contact. At age 1 year, he began to show stereotypic hand movements, bruxism, and constipation. At age 28 months, he presented severe global retardation and slight diffuse hypotonia. At the time of the last observation, at age 37 months, loss of purposeful hand movements, manual apraxia, and slight global hypotonia were persistent. The clinical and laboratory findings did not overlap with any described for Klinefelter syndrome. DNA studies indicated that the additional sex chromosome was paternal in origin, i.e., that the nondisjunction occurred in the paternal first meiotic division.|Clayton-Smith et al. (2000) presented a male with somatic mosaicism for an MECP2 mutation (300005.0010) leading to a progressive but nonfatal neurodevelopmental disorder. The patient was a normal-sized product of a full-term gestation. He was a placid baby who never crawled, but walked at 15 months and learned to say some single words in the second year of life. At around 2 years of age, he lost interest in his surroundings and lost his speech. At age 3 years, he began to have generalized seizures, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed atrophy of the brainstem and frontal and temporal lobes. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed excessive slow-wave activity during sleep and a relative poverty of rhythmic activity while awake. At 6 years of age, he had a thoracic scoliosis and poor lower-limb musculature, and he walked with an ataxic gait. He had abnormal muscle tone with rigidity of the limbs and truncal hypotonia. His feet were small, blue, and puffy. His hand use was very limited, but there were no obvious hand-wringing movements. |Maiwald et al. (2002) reported a 46,XX male with Rett syndrome caused by mutation in the MECP2 gene (300005.0026). Upon amniocentesis performed because of advanced maternal age, a female karyotype was detected in a sonographically male fetus. Both the phenotype and the karyotype were confirmed after birth, and the absence of mullerian structures was demonstrated by ultrasonography. Motor development was delayed; he was able to sit only at 14 months of age. He was still not able to walk and there was no speech at the age of 24 months. At the age of 2 years, he showed truncal muscular hypotonia, microcephaly, spasticity, and convergent strabismus of the left eye. There was a loss of purposeful hand skills at approximately 6 months of age, and a deceleration of head growth at approximately 7 months. The clinical appearance of the boy resembled female Rett cases, which was explained by the karyotype. In addition, preferential expression of the normal allele may have contributed to the rather mild phenotype. The authors noted that similar features had been described in male patients with MECP2 mutations and a Klinefelter karyotype (46,XXY). |Molecular analysis has allowed the broadening of the phenotype of MECP2 mutations beyond RTT to include girls who have mild mental retardation, autism, and a phenotype resembling Angelman syndrome (105830), as well as males with severe encephalopathy. Heilstedt et al. (2002) reported a girl with a phenotype of atypical RTT who had a heterozygous mutation in the MECP2 gene (300005.0016). She presented with hypotonia and developmental delay in infancy without a clear period of normal development. As part of her evaluation for hypotonia, muscle biopsy and respiratory chain enzyme analysis showed a slight decrease in respiratory chain enzyme activity consistent with previous reports of RTT. The mother did not carry an MECP2 mutation. |
180300::multiple factors, including HLA type (see HLA-DRB1; 142857), influence the susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis.|Evidence suggests that several polymorphisms in various genes may also be associated with susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis, including SLC22A4 (604190.0001), PTPN8 (600716.0001) MHC2TA (600005.0007), IRF5 (607218.0002), and NFKBIL1 (601022.0001). Also see MOLECULAR GENETICS.|Rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory disease, primarily of the joints, with autoimmune features and a complex genetic component.|
607154::susceptibility to allergic rhinitis has been associated with polymorphisms in the IL13 gene (147683) on chromosome 5q31 and the FOXJ1 gene (602291) on 17q25.|Allergic rhinitis is a common disease of complex inheritance and is characterized by mucosal inflammation caused by allergen exposure. Allergic rhinitis often affects patients with other coexisting manifestations of allergy such as asthma (600807) and atopic dermatitis (603165).|
215100::rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata type 1 (RCDP1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the PEX7 gene (601757), which encodes the peroxisomal type 2 targeting signal (PTS2) receptor, on chromosome 6q23.|Mutations in the PEX7 gene can also cause an atypical phenotype with longer survival and less neurologic involvement than rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata, normal or near-normal growth, and absence of rhizomelia (see PBD9B, 614879).|Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) is a peroxisomal disorder characterized by disproportionately short stature primarily affecting the proximal parts of the extremities, a typical facial appearance including a broad nasal bridge, epicanthus, high-arched palate, dysplastic external ears, and micrognathia, congenital contractures, characteristic ocular involvement, dwarfism, and severe mental retardation with spasticity. Biochemically, plasmalogen synthesis and phytanic acid alpha-oxidation are defective. Most patients die in the first decade of life. RCDP1 is the most frequent form of RCDP (summary by Wanders and Waterham, 2005). |Individuals with RCDP1, carrying mutations in the PEX7 gene, have cells of peroxisome biogenesis disorder (PBD) complementation group 11 (CG11, equivalent to CGR). For information on the history of PBD complementation groups, see 214100.|Genetic Heterogeneity of Rhizomelic Chondrodysplasia Punctata|RCDP2 (222765) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding acyl-CoA:dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase (GNPAT; 602744) on chromosome 1q42. RCDP3 (600121) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding alkyldihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase (alkyl-DHAP synthase) (AGPS; 603051) on chromosome 2q31. RCDP5 (616716) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding peroxisomal biogenesis factor-5 (PEX5; 600414) on chromosome 12p13.|Whereas RCDP1 is a peroxisomal biogenesis disorder (PBD), RCDP2 and RCDP3 are classified as single peroxisome enzyme deficiencies (Waterham and Ebberink, 2012). |Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata is a rare, multisystem, developmental disorder, characterized by severe bilateral shortening and metaphyseal changes of femora and/or humeri, microcephaly, characteristic facial features, and severe psychomotor retardation and spasticity. Cataracts are present in about 72% of cases, and skin changes in about 28% (Spranger et al., 1971). The coronal cleft of the vertebral bodies is demonstrable radiologically and appears to represent embryonic arrest with cartilage occupying the cleft between the anterior and posterior parts of the vertebral bodies (Wells et al., 1992). |There are several different disorders with similar punctate cartilaginous changes, e.g., X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata (see 302960); the multiple forms of the Zellweger syndrome (see 214100); maternal ingestion of certain anticoagulants (dicoumarol or warfarin; 118650) in early pregnancy; and even occasionally trisomy 18 (Rosenfield et al., 1962). Thus, care must be taken in diagnosing an infant or child presenting with punctate calcifications (Spranger et al., 1971). The combination of punctate calcifications, rhizomelia, and the biochemical abnormalities (deficient red cell plasmalogens and accumulation of phytanic acid) is pathognomic for RCDP (Wanders and Waterham, 2005). |Melnick (1965) observed a child with punctate calcifications in the offspring of a father-daughter mating. |Early literature on CDP is confusing because the heterogeneous etiology of punctate calcifications was not recognized. For example, the evolution of punctate calcifications in early life into multiple epiphyseal dysplasia was observed by Silverman (1961) and the inheritance seemed to be dominant; thus it is likely that an entity (or entities) other than RCDP was represented (see 118650). Fifteen-year follow-up of a heterogeneous group of patients with punctate calcifications was provided by Comings et al. (1968). Saddle nose secondary to involvement of the facial bones was noted in about 40% of cases in a series of cases of punctate calcifications according to Fritsch and Manzke (1963) and is more typical of warfarin embryopathy. In Australia this feature led to the designation koala bear syndrome (Danks, 1970). It was the suggestion of a group convened in Paris by the European Society of Pediatric Radiology that this phenotype be called chondrodysplasia punctata (Maroteaux, 1970). They suggested that cases labeled as chondrodystrophia calcificans by De Lange and Janssen (1949), Gekle (1963), Phillips (1957) (case 2), and Putschar (1951) actually included patients with Zellweger syndrome. |Happle (1981) suggested that cataracts are consistently absent in the autosomal dominant form of chondrodysplasia punctata (118650) and present in about two-thirds of the rhizomelic and X-linked dominant (302950) forms. In the rhizomelic form, the opacities tend to be bilateral and symmetric; in the X-linked form, they are usually asymmetric and often unilateral. |Gray et al. (1992) reported an affected female, the offspring of first-cousin parents, who had no punctate calcification evident at birth, although there was coronal clefting of the vertebrae. Early cataract formation was evident by 18 weeks, and at 8 months of age a further skeletal survey revealed traces of punctate calcification of the epiphyses and spine. The patient had pulmonary stenosis and atrial septal defect. The electroretinogram was grossly abnormal. |Heymans et al. (1985) first suggested that rhizomelic CDP is a peroxisomal disorder. Because of clinical similarities to Zellweger syndrome, they did studies that showed evidence for their proposal. In 5 patients with rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata, they found a severe deficiency of plasmalogens in phospholipids from red cells and deficient activity of the enzyme acyl-CoA:dihydroxyacetone-phosphate acyltransferase in platelets and cultured skin fibroblasts. Moreover, as in Zellweger syndrome, the plasma phytanic acid concentrations were found to be elevated. |Wanders et al. (1986) did cell-fusion studies of complementation between RCDP and either Zellweger syndrome or the infantile form of Refsum disease (266500). In either case the activity of acyl-CoA:dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase was restored, thus indicating the distinctness of RCDP from these other 2 conditions. The other 2 did not complement; this may indicate that they are caused by allelic mutations, or contrariwise they may be nonallelic but perhaps 'complementation cannot occur after fusion because of the absence of preexisting peroxisomes' (Wanders et al., 1986). |Poulos et al. (1988) studied 2 patients, 1 of whom survived only 13 days and the other of whom was still alive at age 8 years. Both showed markedly reduced fibroblast alkyldihydroxyacetone phosphate synthase activity (approximately 10% of control mean); in contrast, dihydroxyacetone phosphate acyltransferase activity was only moderately reduced (50% of control mean). Plasmalogen levels were very low in brain and liver. The accumulation of phytanic acid observed in plasma and liver was paralleled by a reduced ability of the patients' fibroblasts to oxidize phytanic acid. There appear to be abnormalities in 2 seemingly unrelated pathways, phytanic acid oxidation and ether lipid biosynthesis. |Heikoop et al. (1990) demonstrated a deficiency of 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase in peroxisomes and impaired processing of the enzyme. Peroxisomal thiolase is present in its unprocessed precursor form (44 kD). |By complementation analysis after somatic cell fusion, Heikoop et al. (1992) investigated the genetic relationship among 10 patients with clinical manifestations of rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata. Biochemically, 9 of 10 patients had a partial deficiency of acyl-CoA:dihydroxyacetone phosphate acyltransferase (DHAP-AT) and impairment of plasmalogen biosynthesis, phytanate catabolism, and the maturation of peroxisomal 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase. A fusion of fibroblasts from these 9 patients with Zellweger fibroblasts resulted in complementation as indicated by restoration of DHAP-AT activity, plasmalogen biosynthesis, and punctate fluorescence after staining with a monoclonal antibody to peroxisomal thiolase. No complementation was observed after fusion of different combinations of the 9 RCDP cell lines, suggesting that they belong to a single complementation group. The tenth patient was characterized biochemically by a deficiency of DHAP-AT and an impairment of plasmalogen biosynthesis. Maturation and localization of peroxisomal thiolase were normal, however. Furthermore, fusion of fibroblasts from this patient with fibroblasts from the other 9 patients resulted in complementation as indicated by the restoration of plasmalogen biosynthesis. Heikoop et al. (1992) concluded that at least 2 different genes can lead to the clinical phenotype of RCDP. |Sheffield et al. (1989) reviewed 103 cases of chondrodysplasia punctata seen in Melbourne over a 20-year period. In 8 cases RCDP was diagnosed; only in this type were abnormalities of peroxisomal function found. In 21 cases Conradi-Hunermann CDP was diagnosed but difficulties in defining this subcategory were evident. Two cases appeared to represent an X-linked dominant form. No definite X-linked recessive cases were seen. In 57 cases the CDP was of the mild type, including 9 cases due to phenytoin exposure during pregnancy and 3 cases due to Warfarin embryopathy. A newly characterized mesomelic form was present in 2 cases. Classification was impossible in 13 cases. Sheffield et al. (1989) concluded that Binder syndrome (155050) should be classified as a mild form of chondrodysplasia punctata.|Wardinsky et al. (1990) reported 5 patients with this disorder, 3 of whom survived beyond 1 year of age. Three of the 5 patients had no radiographic evidence of vertebral body clefts. Three biochemical abnormalities appear to be distinctive of the peroxisome abnormality of RCDP: reduced phytanic acid oxidation activity; a defect in plasmalogen synthesis; and presence of the unprocessed form of peroxisomal thiolase. Poll-The et al. (1991) described the case of a female infant, offspring of consanguineous parents, with RCDP and characteristic biochemical findings but distinctive clinical features. At 12 days of age, the girl showed absence of movement of the upper limbs with pain on passive movement of both shoulders. There were no other clinical abnormalities except for a flattened nasal bridge. Stippled epiphyses were found at many sites. At 7.5 months of age, bilateral cataracts were present. Length was at the 10th percentile. |Borochowitz (1991) described a girl with unusual features that included short and broad humeri, symmetrical brachymetacarpy, especially of the fourth metacarpals, and hypoplastic distal phalanges as well as sagittal clefting of vertebral bodies and punctate calcifications at various areas including the entire spine, sacrum, hands, feet, trachea, and thyroid cartilage. He suggested that this represents a distinct form of chondrodysplasia punctata which might be called the humerometacarpal (HM) type. |Dimmick et al. (1991) found de novo deletion del(4)(p14p16) in a newborn male with what they called rhizomelic CDP, but with normal peroxisomes as indicated by electron microscopy and normal plasmalogen synthesis in cultured fibroblasts. Fetal ultrasound demonstrated rhizomelia with epiphyseal stippling and diaphragmatic hernia. Facial anomalies with left cleft lip and bilateral cleft palate were present. The infant died soon after birth. Autopsy findings included polymicrogyria, pulmonary hypoplasia, and polysplenia.|Agamanolis and Novak (1995) examined the brain of a girl with CDP who died at the age of 3 years. The brain weighed 525 g (half of normal size) but myelination was normal. The thalamus and basal ganglia were diminished in size and the cerebellum showed severe loss of Purkinje cells. |Khanna et al. (2001) described a 2-year-old female with RCDP leading to advanced cervical stenosis as detected by MRI studies of the cervical spine. MRI studies were done when the patient was 13 months old because of radiographic findings and the presence of lower extremity spasticity greater than upper extremity spasticity. |White et al. (2003) delineated the natural history of RCDP through analysis of 35 previously unreported cases and a review of 62 published cases with respect to length of survival and cause of death. Survival was greater than previously reported, with 90% surviving up to 1 year and 50% surviving up to 6 years. The cause of death was usually respiratory in nature. All infants were found to have joint contractures, bilateral cataracts, and severe growth and psychomotor delays. |
608611::ribose 5-phosphate isomerase deficiency is caused by compound heterozygous mutation in the RPIA gene (180430) on chromosome 2p11. One such patient has been reported.|Van der Knaap et al. (1999) reported a 14-year-old boy, born of unrelated parents, with leukoencephalopathy associated with a disturbance in the metabolism of polyols. The boy had psychomotor retardation from early in life and developed epilepsy at age 4 years. From age 7 years, a slow neurologic regression occurred with prominent cerebellar ataxia, some spasticity, optic atrophy, and a mild sensorimotor neuropathy. Neither organomegaly nor dysfunction of the internal organs was present. Motor and sensory nerve conduction velocities were mildly decreased in his arms and legs, confirming a polyneuropathy. Extensive abnormalities of the cerebral white matter were demonstrated by MRI of the brain at age 14 years. Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy of the brain showed highly elevated abnormal peaks that were identified as representing pentitols ribitol and arabitol. Huck et al. (2004) demonstrated deficient activity of ribose 5-phosphate isomerase, one of the pentose phosphate pathway enzymes, in fibroblasts from the patient reported by van der Knaap et al. (1999). They noted that deficiency of transaldolase (602063), another enzyme in the pentose phosphate pathway, had previously been demonstrated in a patient with liver cirrhosis and abnormal polyol levels in body fluids. RPI deficiency represented the second instance of an inborn error in the reversible phase of the pentose phosphate pathway, confirming that defects in pentose and polyol metabolism constitute a group of inborn metabolic disorders. |
268700::Saccharopinuria, also known as hyperlysinemia type II, is an autosomal recessive metabolic condition with few, if any, clinical manifestations. Hyperlysinemia type II and hyperlysinemia type I (238700) both result from deficiency of the bifunctional enzyme AASS (605113) on chromosome 7q31. The AASS gene encodes lysine alpha-ketoglutarate reductase and saccharopine dehydrogenase, which catalyze, respectively, the sequential conversion of lysine to saccharopine and saccharopine to alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde and glutamate (summary by Tondo et al., 2013). In hyperlysinemia type I, both enzymatic functions of AASS are defective and patients have increased serum lysine and possibly increased saccharopine; in hyperlysinemia type II, most of the first enzymatic function is retained, and patients tend to have isolated saccharopine increase (Cox, 1985; Cox et al., 1985). |Carson et al. (1968) reported saccharopinuria in a 22-year-old moderately retarded, somewhat short girl with EEG abnormalities but no history of seizures; her urine also contained lysine, citrulline, and histidine. No other family members were affected. |Simell et al. (1972) described a 3.5-year-old girl with spastic diplegia who had lysinuria and saccharopinuria, but normal plasma levels of citrulline. Somatically and mentally she was normal. Simell et al. (1973) demonstrated deficiency of the saccharopine-degrading enzyme aminoadipic semialdehyde-glutamate reductase in cultured fibroblasts and in muscle. The enzyme was reduced to 40% of normal. |Cederbaum et al. (1979) reported a 7-year-old boy with mild developmental delay, hyperactivity, and speech delay who was found to have increased serum and urinary lysine and saccharopine. Saccharopine was also present in cerebrospinal fluid. Initial studies suggested cystinuria, but further analysis indicated that the amino acid was saccharopine. Patient fibroblasts showed undetectable activities of both lysine ketoglutarate reductase and saccharopine dehydrogenase. Reexamination of the urine of previously studied cases of this double enzyme deficiency (Dancis et al., 1976) suggested that saccharopinuria of variable degree is the rule and not the exception in patients with hyperlysinemia. |
604369::Salla disease (SD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SLC17A5 gene (604322) on chromosome 6q13.Infantile sialic storage disease (ISSD; 269920) is an allelic disorder.|Sialic acid storage diseases are autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorders that may present as a severe infantile form (ISSD) or as a slowly progressive adult form that is prevalent in Finland (Salla disease). The main symptoms are hypotonia, cerebellar ataxia, and mental retardation; visceromegaly and coarse features are also present in the infantile cases. Progressive cerebellar atrophy and dysmyelination have been documented by MRI. Enlarged lysosomes are seen on electron microscopic studies, and patients excrete large amounts of free sialic acid in the urine (Verheijen et al., 1999). |Salla disease is an adult form of sialuria, also called sialic acid storage disease, that has been found particularly in residents of an area of Finland. In a northeastern part of Finland, Aula et al. (1979) observed Salla disease in 4 adults in 2 sibships related as second cousins. In addition, 27 possible cases in 10 sibships were known. Features are mental retardation, clumsiness, onset at 12 to 18 months of age with deterioration in the second decade, 4 to 15% vacuolated lymphocytes, enlarged storage lysosomes, and increased sialic acid in the urine. The disease was named for the geographic area where the kindred lived. Urinary excretion of mucopolysaccharides, amino acids, glycoasparagines, and oligosaccharides was normal. Three brothers were affected in 1 sibship, as well as a female third cousin of theirs. The disorder was first detected during a survey for aspartylglucosaminuria, in a search for cytoplasmic vacuoles. |Using both clinical and laboratory methods in an examination of mentally retarded patients mainly in northern Finland, Renlund et al. (1983) identified 34 patients who satisfied the following criteria for Salla disease: progressive psychomotor retardation of early onset, lysosomal storage, and increased urinary excretion of free sialic acid (N-acetylneuraminic acid; NeuAc). The patients showed ataxia, athetosis, rigidity, spasticity, and impaired speech. Growth retardation, thick calvaria, and exotropia were present in about half the patients. Progressive diminution in the amplitude of the EEG was noted. Life span appeared to be normal; patients ranged from 3 to 63 years in age. |No precisely similar patients with urinary excretion of free sialic acid had, it seemed, been reported outside Finland. However, Hancock et al. (1982) reported a patient with extensive accumulation of free NeuAc in tissues and abnormal storage lysosomes who pursued a fulminant clinical course ending in death at 5 months. The amount of free sialic acid in the urine was about 20 times higher than the 15- to 30-fold increase in Salla patients. |Wolburg-Buchholz et al. (1985) reported 3 affected sibs in a sibship of 8. One affected girl died at 8 years and another at age 17. A 9-year-old boy was alive with severe psychomotor retardation with spastic tetraparesis and convulsions. Microscopic studies including ultrastructural examinations showed lysosomal vacuolization in mesenchymal and parenchymal cells. Increased amounts of free sialic acid in the urine and sialic acid storage in cultured fibroblasts were consistent with Salla disease. The family had no known Finnish ancestry. Echenne et al. (1986) described the case of a 5-year-old boy from southern France. |Baumkotter et al. (1985) reported a patient with early-onset sialic acid storage disease whose early clinical course was similar to that of Salla disease but who had clinical and skeletal abnormalities not mentioned in that disorder. In 3 patients with different forms of NANA storage disease, accumulation of free NANA in the lysosomes was found in cultured fibroblasts, suggesting a transport defect (Mancini et al., 1986). One of the samples came from a patient with Salla disease, a second came from an infant with the severe form of NSD, and the third came from a child with a milder infantile form. |Haataja et al. (1994) described 4 patients with an unusually severe form of Salla disease, more severe than those of 86 other Finnish patients. Hypotonia and developmental delay were first noted between 2 and 4 months of age. The patients were living, with ages ranging from 11 to 24, but were severely mentally retarded, either not responsive to the environment or responding only with facial gestures. All of them suffered from generalized tonic-clonic seizures, unlike the typical absence-like epilepsy in usual Salla disease. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the severely affected individuals demonstrated abnormally high signal intensity of subcortical white matter with sparing of the U fibers. There was no abnormality of basal ganglia. In these 4 severe cases and more typical cases, there were similar white matter changes in the thin string-like corpus callosum. Cerebellar atrophy was noted in the severely affected individuals but was not apparent on the scans of patients with typical Salla disease. In all these patients the MRI resembled the myelination pattern of a several-month-old infant. Linkage and haplotype analysis did not distinguish these 4 patients with the unusually severe course from the other Finnish patients with typical Salla disease. The authors raised the possibility of homoallelic heterogeneity. |
268900::sarcosinemia (SARCOS) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SARDH gene (604455) on chromosome 9q34.|Sarcosinemia is characterized by an increased concentration of sarcosine in plasma and an increased excretion of sarcosine in urine. Sarcosine (N-methylglycine) is enzymatically formed from dimethylglycine by dimethylglycine dehydrogenase (EC 1.5.99.2) and converted to glycine by sarcosine dehydrogenase (SARDH; 604455; EC 1.5.99.1). Some reports have associated sarcosinemia with mental retardation and neurologic problems, but the disorder is most likely benign and unrelated to significant clinical problems (summary by Scott, 2001).|Gerritsen and Waisman (1966) found hypersarcosinemia and sarcosinuria in brother and sister with mild mental retardation and few other abnormalities. Abnormal increases in blood and urine sarcosine occurred in 2 other sibs, the mother, a maternal aunt, and the maternal grandmother (but not in the father) when sarcosine or its precursor dimethylglycine were administered. |Scott et al. (1970) reported a patient with sarcosinemia who had motor and mental retardation. They found, by loading tests, a decreased capacity to convert sarcosine to glycine, suggesting a deficiency of sarcosine dehydrogenase activity. They concluded that sarcosinemia is a benign metabolic state with no clinical manifestations. They viewed earlier impressions to the contrary as the result of bias of ascertainment, i.e., the discovery of sarcosinemia in children being investigated for abnormalities.|Levy et al. (1984) reported 4 patients with sarcosinemia who were detected by routine neonatal screening. All of the patients were mentally normal with no dysmorphic or other abnormal features.|Sewell et al. (1986) stated that 16 cases of sarcosinemia had been reported. They reported sarcosinemia in a retarded, amaurotic child of Turkish ancestry. |Meissner and Mayatepek (1997) reported the case of a 22-year-old woman who at the age of 5 years developed the first symptoms of sarcosinemia in the form of progressive loss of speech ability. One year later, she developed neurologic symptoms, including muscular hypotonia, pyramidal tract signs with unaffected sensation, paresis of the peroneal nerve, and subsequently ataxia. At that time, gross elevations of the concentration of sarcosine in plasma and urine were detected. By the age of 7 years she was no longer able to walk, finally resulting in complete tetraparesis at 15 years of age. At that time, she lost her speech totally, and bilateral optic atrophy became prominent. At the age of 18 years, she developed tonic-clonic seizures. MRI showed general cerebral atrophy. At the age of 20 years, echocardiography revealed biventricular hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with functional infundibular pulmonic stenosis and reduced pulmonary outflow. The severe symptoms had not been reported previously in association with sarcosinemia. The possibility of a second disorder was raised since generally sarcosinemia is a completely benign condition. Meissner and Mayatepek (1997) commented that, since more than a single enzyme defect may be responsible for sarcosinemia, different clinical phenotypes may exist, including at least some patients with neurologic and other severe clinical symptoms. |Sarcosinemia and sarcosinuria also occur in some patients with type II glutaric aciduria (see 231675 and 231680) and with severe deficiency of folic acid (Scott, 2001).|
616834::microcephaly, congenital cataract, and psoriasiform dermatitis (MCCPD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SC4MOL gene (MSMO1; 607545) on chromosome 4q32.|SC4MOL deficiency represents an inborn error of cholesterol metabolism that is characterized by accumulation of a large amount of methylsterols, particularly dimethylsterols, in affected patients. The associated features of immune dysregulation, skin disease, and growth delay can be at least partially corrected with cholesterol and statin supplements (He et al., 2014). |He et al. (2011) reported a 15-year-old girl who presented at age 13 years for evaluation of severe ichthyosiform erythroderma affecting the entire body but sparing the palms. Her skin was normal at birth, but periumbilical dermatitis was noted when she was 2 years old; dermatitis then spread to her back and trunk and ultimately to the remainder of her body by age 6. The dermatitis worsened in winter or with stress, and at one point almost completely normalized. There was no long-term response, however, to traditional therapies for psoriasis. Skin histology showed psoriasiform hyperplasia with CD68 (153634)-negative lipid-laden foamy cells in the dermis. The patient also exhibited microcephaly, congenital cataracts, mild developmental delay, and failure to thrive. Serum lipid profile showed persistently low total cholesterol, HDL, and LDL, with normal triglycerides and VLDL. A cholesterol biosynthesis defect was suspected, and plasma sterol analysis showed a 20-fold increase in 4-alpha-monomethyl sterols and a 500-fold increase in 4,4-prime-dimethyl sterols. No 4-carboxylmethylsterol or 4-methylsterone was detected in patient skin or plasma. Methylsterols were markedly elevated in patient fibroblasts compared to controls, and the level of methylsterols increased when the patient cells were grown in cholesterol-depleted medium. Experiments with culture medium were consistent with a block at the step of sterol-C4-methyl oxidase (607545) in the cholesterol synthesis pathway. Vockley et al. (2011) stated that at age 15, the patient exhibited delayed puberty. She had received 2 years of treatment with an oral statin and supplementation of cholesterol and bile acids, following which her plasma methylsterol levels normalized, her weight and linear growth improved dramatically, and her arthralgias resolved. Application of a topical statin plus cholesterol suspension resulted in marked improvement of her skin disease. In addition, analysis of immunocyte profiles before and after therapy revealed a significant reduction in granulocyte activation after treatment, approaching levels seen in her heterozygous parents. Vockley et al. (2011) also reported a girl with microcephaly, developmental delay, congenital cataracts, and joint contractures that were most marked in the lower extremities. (The same girl was later reported by He et al., 2014). The authors noted that although her skin appeared normal, she had increased expression of CD25 (IL2RA; 147730) and TLR2 (603028) in leukocytes and IgD receptors in the B-cell population that was similar to the original patient.|
181500::multiple gene loci are involved in the causation of this complex trait. Other entries describe schizophrenia susceptibility loci that have been identified or are suspected from linkage or association studies or chromosomal aberrations.|Schizophrenia is a psychosis, a disorder of thought and sense of self. Although it affects emotions, it is distinguished from mood disorders in which such disturbances are primary. Similarly, there may be mild impairment of cognitive function, and it is distinguished from the dementias in which disturbed cognitive function is considered primary. There is no characteristic pathology, such as neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer disease (104300). Schizophrenia is a common disorder with a lifetime prevalence of approximately 1%. It is highly heritable but the genetics are complex. This may not be a single entity.|Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (see 125480) are generally considered to be separate entities, but patients who exhibit multiple symptoms of both disorders are often given the hybrid diagnosis schizoaffective disorder (Blacker and Tsuang, 1992). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Schizophrenia with or without an Affective Disorder|SCZD4 (600850) is associated with variation in the PRODH gene (606810); SCZD9 (604906) with variation in the DISC1 gene (605210); SCZD15 (613950) with variation in the SHANK3 gene (606230); SCZD16 (613959) with a chromosome duplication involving the VIPR2 gene (601970); SCZD17 (see 614332) with variation in the NRXN1 gene (600565); SCZD18 (615232) with variation in the SLC1A1 gene (133550); and SCZD19 (617629) with variation in the RBM12 gene (607179).|For associations pending confirmation, see MAPPING and MOLECULAR GENETICS.|Schizophrenia is characterized by a constellation of symptoms including hallucinations and delusions (psychotic symptoms) and symptoms such as severely inappropriate emotional responses, disordered thinking and concentration, erratic behavior, as well as social and occupational deterioration. It often develops in young adults who were previously normal (Andreasen, 1995). |In his first description of dementia praecox, Kraepelin identified subtypes of schizophrenia: hebephrenic, catatonic, and paranoid (Diefendorf, 1902). The utility and validity of these subtypes was long a subject of debate. Kendler et al. (1994) sought to clarify differences in outcome and familial psychopathology among these 3 subtypes in the Roscommon Family Study of severe mental illness conducted in a rural county in western Ireland. They found that the subtypes did not 'breed true' within families. They concluded that from a familial perspective the subtypes are not etiologically distinct syndromes. |Kendler and Hays (1982) compared a group of 30 patients with familial schizophrenia (defined as having an affected first-degree relative) and a group of 83 cases of sporadic schizophrenia. No difference in the intensity of (1) flattened, depressed, or elevated affect, (2) auditory hallucinations, or (3) delusions was found; however, more of the familial (56.7%) than of the sporadic (18.1%) schizophrenic patients had severe thought disorders. EEGs performed while the patients were taking neuroleptics showed abnormality in 72.3% of sporadic cases and 43.3% of familial cases. |Extrapyramidal signs such as bradykinesia, rigidity, or dyskinesias in patients with schizophrenia are usually attributed to antipsychotic drugs, many of which are dopamine-receptor antagonists. Chatterjee et al. (1995) prospectively studied 89 patients presenting with a first episode of schizophrenia who had never taken neuroleptic medications. Using the Simpson Dyskinesia Rating Scale, they found 16.9% (15) of these individuals to have significant extrapyramidal dysfunction on presentation. Twelve of the patients had akinesia, 6 had rigidity, 1 had cogwheeling, and 1 had mild spontaneous dyskinesia. These observations gave support to earlier proposals that the basal ganglia may be involved in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. |Kunugi et al. (1994) found no significant difference in head circumference at birth between 64 infants who later developed schizophrenia and 45 of their healthy sibs. Nopoulos et al. (1995) demonstrated decreased volume of the frontal lobe and increased volume of the intersulcal CSF in 12 males and 12 females presenting with a first episode of schizophrenia, compared to 24 controls matched for age, height, weight, parental social class, and paternal and maternal education. |Eye movement disturbances have been found in about 40 to 80% of patients with schizophrenia, about 25 to 40% of their healthy first-degree relatives, and in less than 10% of healthy control subjects (Holzman, 2000). |Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (125480) are generally considered to be separate entities, but patients who exhibit multiple symptoms of both disorders are often given the hybrid diagnosis schizoaffective disorder (Blacker and Tsuang, 1992). The clinical features of such patients supported the argument that schizophrenia and bipolar disorder are variant expressions of a diathesis, in part because of the similar disease frequencies, ages at onset, and absence of sex bias in the 2 disorders. |Hallmayer et al. (2005) pointed out that Kraepelin (1909) viewed the disorder he termed dementia praecox as a cognitive disorder. Coining the term schizophrenia to replace dementia praecox, Bleuler (1920) emphasized that it 'is not a disease in the strict sense, but appears to be a group of diseases...Therefore we should speak of schizophrenias in the plural.' Hallmayer et al. (2005) stated that the inherent heterogeneity originally recognized has been obfuscated in modern diagnostic classifications, which are designed to meet the needs of patient management, not fundamental research, and which may not target phenotypes anchored in the biology of the illness. Limited understanding of phenotypic heterogeneity is a common challenge in genetic studies of complex disorders. |
128230::dopa-responsive dystonia, or autosomal dominant Segawa syndrome, is caused by heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding GTP cyclohydrolase I (GCH1; 600225) on chromosome 14q13. GTP cyclohydrolase I is rate-limiting in the conversion of GTP to tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), the cofactor for tyrosine hydroxylase, which in turn is the rate-limiting enzyme for dopamine synthesis.|See 233910 for a discussion of BH4-deficient hyperphenylalaninemia B (HPABH4B) and autosomal recessive dopa-responsive dystonia with or without hyperphenylalaninemia, allelic disorders caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the GCH1 gene.|An autosomal recessive form of Segawa syndrome (605407) is caused by mutation in the tyrosine hydroxylase gene (TH; 191290).|Segawa et al. (1976) reported 9 patients in 6 families with postural and motor disturbances showing marked diurnal fluctuation. Dystonic posture or movement of one limb appeared insidiously between ages 1 and 9 years. All limbs were involved within 5 years of onset. Torsion of the trunk was unusual. Rigidity, resting tremors, or cerebellar, pyramidal and sensory changes were not found, and intelligence was normal. Symptoms were remarkably alleviated after sleep and aggravated gradually toward evening. |Allen and Knopp (1976) observed a family in which 3 females had dopa-responsive dystonia: the proband, her paternal grandmother, and her niece. The proband's father had died at age 34 years. A disorder of gait ('walking on the ball of her foot') started in the proband at age 6 years and tremor in the hands at age 10. Achilles tenotomy was performed at age 11. In her thirties, striking improvement occurred with L-DOPA and anticholinergic medication. The paternal grandmother had onset of tremors at age 13 years. Flexion dystonia of the fingers and fixed facial expression were evident by age 54. She became immobile and bedridden after age 64 and died at age 80. The niece, aged 15 at the time of report, showed dystonic movements of the right hand and a longstanding disturbance of gait. L-DOPA resulted in improvement. Although these patients were earlier thought to have had juvenile Parkinson disease (168100), Nygaard et al. (1988) concluded that they had dopa-responsive dystonia. |Nygaard and Duvoisin (1986) studied a family with an extrapyramidal disorder characterized by childhood onset of lower limb and axial dystonia, followed by parkinsonism. Dramatic response to levodopa therapy and minimal progression in adulthood were features. A family described by de Yebenes et al. (1988) had childhood onset of a dopa-responsive form of dystonia involving legs, gait, and balance. Diurnal fluctuation of symptoms and features of parkinsonism were common. Nygaard et al. (1990) described the spectrum of clinical manifestations in this large English/American family. The dystonia was nearly completely ameliorated by levodopa therapy. Penetrance of the dystonia gene was estimated to be 35% in this family. Four persons carrying the dystonia gene (2 affected and 2 obligate gene carriers) manifested parkinsonism later in life. A somewhat higher frequency than in the general population suggested that parkinsonism is a manifestation of this disorder. |In a study of 66 patients with DRD, including 47 with familial disease and 19 with sporadic disease, Nygaard et al. (1991) found that levodopa was the most effective treatment, with an excellent response lasting as long as 10 to 22 years. The authors noted that the coexistence of parkinsonian features and the dramatic responsiveness to levodopa are two clinical features of DRD that separate it from other forms of idiopathic torsion dystonia. In addition, the sustained nature of the levodopa responsiveness, free from the complications of therapy that typically occur in Parkinson disease (wearing-off, 'on-off,' and unpredictable dose response), distinguish DRD from other causes of childhood-onset dystonia-parkinsonism such as cerebral palsy or spastic diplegia. |Harwood et al. (1994) described a family in which 6 members of 4 generations had dopa-responsive dystonia. The disorder presented in childhood with dystonia of the legs, progressing to parkinsonism and pseudo-pyramidal deficits, or in adult life with parkinsonism and pseudo-pyramidal signs. The pseudo-pyramidal signs included exaggerated tendon reflexes and extensor plantar responses. Remarkably, in the 3 family members with childhood onset, the symptoms and signs of the condition were abolished 36 to 52 years later by small doses of levodopa. No long-term side effects of levodopa had appeared after 15 years of treatment. |Steinberger et al. (1998) demonstrated marked variation in expressivity, even between affected members of the same kindred. Whereas one of their index cases had difficulty walking from age 3 years and was wheelchair-bound from age 6, the only demonstrable sign in her 43-year-old mother was tightening of the legs while she wrote with her left hand. |Brique et al. (1999) reported a family with DRD in which 4 of 9 sibs were affected; DNA was available on 3 of the affected individuals. Two sisters were 7 and 8 years of age when dystonia appeared. A simultaneous parkinsonism developed in 1, whereas it occurred after the age of 54 years in the second sister. Levodopa therapy was effective in both. In the 2 brothers, dystonia began at age 13 and 15 years. Parkinsonism (rest tremor) appeared at age 15 in 1 brother. Dystonia and parkinsonism spontaneously disappeared at age 40 and age 44, respectively, in the 2 brothers. For 17 years the brothers were free of symptoms; parkinsonism then reappeared in both of them, but was dramatically improved by levodopa. Genetic analysis revealed a mutation in the GCH1 gene (600225.0015). |Hahn et al. (2001) described a family with clinically variable neurologic and psychiatric manifestations and a novel mutation in the GCH1 gene. The proband was a young boy with variable foot dystonia and fatigue. Eleven additional members of the family were found to have the same mutation, of which 2 members were unaffected. Of the 9 affected members, there was a wide range of clinical phenotypes, including dystonia, torticollis, brisk deep tendon reflexes, and levodopa-responsive parkinsonism. Clinical deafness was found in 50% of affected family members. The father of the proband had a long history of anxiety and depression. Based on CSF analysis, Hahn et al. (2001) suggested that the mutation may produce a defect in cerebral dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine biosynthesis, contributing to psychiatric manifestations. Detailed histories revealed that the family had multiple members with psychiatric symptoms, including depression, anxiety, obsessive-compulsive traits, and eating disorders. Hahn et al. (2001) concluded that the range of neuropsychiatric features may be related to mutation in the GCH1 gene and should be included in diagnostic criteria. |Chaila et al. (2006) reported 4 adult female sibs from Ireland with DRD confirmed by genetic analysis late in life. All had childhood-onset dystonia and pyramidal tract signs, 3 had additional extrapyramidal signs, including tremor, bradykinesia, or rigidity, and 2 had definite signs of cerebellar dysfunction. All had mild horizontal gaze-evoked nystagmus. Treatment with levodopa therapy resulted in marked clinical improvement of dystonia and cerebellar signs. The authors concluded that some patients with DRD may show cerebellar signs. |Grotzsch et al. (2002) reported a 3-generation Swiss family with dopa-responsive dystonia in which 7 members were definitely affected and 4 members were possibly affected. The pattern of inheritance was autosomal dominant. The proband was a 77-year-old woman who had developed dystonia of the lower limbs by age 3 years, leading to gait and postural abnormalities which worsened by the end of the day. The condition progressed, leaving her wheelchair-bound and with generalized dystonia and parkinsonism. Treatment with levodopa markedly improved symptoms. Brain autopsy of an affected patient showed severe depigmentation (hypomelanization) of the large neurons of the substantia nigra and the locus ceruleus, although the number of these neurons appeared unaffected. The defect was asymmetric, with the lateral areas more severely depigmented than the medial areas.|
612780::this disorder, which comprises seizures, sensorineural deafness, ataxia, mental retardation, and electrolyte imbalance (SESAME syndrome), is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the KCNJ10 gene (602208) on chromosome 1q23.|Scholl et al. (2009) reported 5 patients from 4 families with a complex disorder characterized by onset of generalized seizures in infancy, delayed psychomotor development, ataxia, and sensorineural hearing loss. One patient was reported in detail. She developed seizures at age 3 months and was unable to walk or speak at age 5 years and 7 months. She had markedly reduced muscle strength in the lower limbs, severe ataxia, and progressive axonal neuropathy with hypomyelination confirmed by sural nerve biopsy. Sensorineural hearing loss became apparent at age 18. She had 2 presumably affected sibs: 1 had seizures, was never able to walk, and died at age from a diarrheal illness, and the other presented with seizures and vomiting at age 5 months, was unable to walk until 16 months, and died at 18 months from an infection. The other 4 patients had a similar disorder, with intention tremor and cerebellar atrophy in some of them. Laboratory studies in all patients showed persistent hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and hypomagnesemia. Plasma renin and aldosterone were increased in the absence of hypertension. Urinary studies showed potassium, magnesium, and sodium wasting. Salt craving, enuresis, and polydipsia/polyuria were reported, consistent with renal salt wasting. Scholl et al. (2009) termed this disorder 'SeSAME syndrome.' |Bockenhauer et al. (2009) reported a consanguineous family of Pakistani origin in which 4 children presented in infancy with generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Another child from an unrelated consanguineous Arabic family had a similar disorder. All 5 patients had speech and motor delay as well as pronounced gait ataxia, intention tremor, and dysdiadochokinesis, consistent with cerebellar dysfunction. Two patients were unable to walk at age 9 and 3 years, respectively. Brain MRI, electromyographic studies, and nerve conduction velocities were all normal in those patients studied. Four patients developed sensorineural hearing impairment; the fifth patient was not tested. Laboratory studies showed hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, hypomagnesemia, and hypocalciuria. There was no proteinuria or glycosuria, and kidney ultrasound was normal. Blood pressure was at the low end of the normal range. All patients were receiving potassium and magnesium supplements. Bockenhauer et al. (2009) referred to the disorder as 'EAST syndrome' for epilepsy, ataxia, sensorineural deafness, and tubulopathy. |Freudenthal et al. (2011) reported 6 patients with genetically confirmed EAST syndrome characterized by epilepsy from infancy, debilitating ataxia from an early age with difficulties in walking, sensorineural deafness, and hypokalemic metabolic acidosis with variable hypomagnesemia. One patient was born of consanguineous Algerian parents, 2 sibs were born of consanguineous Indian parents, 2 sibs were born of unrelated Afro-Caribbean parents, and 1 boy was born of unrelated Iranian parents. |
212350::Sengers syndrome, also known as cardiomyopathic mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome-10 (MTDPS10), is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the AGK gene (610345) on chromosome 7q34.|For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of autosomal recessive mtDNA depletion syndromes, see MTDPS1 (603041).|Sengers syndrome is an autosomal recessive mitochondrial disorder characterized by congenital cataracts, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy, exercise intolerance, and lactic acidosis. Mental development is normal, but affected individuals may die early from cardiomyopathy (summary by Mayr et al., 2012). Skeletal muscle biopsies of 2 affected individuals showed severe mtDNA depletion (Calvo et al., 2012). |In 7 of 22 children in 3 unrelated sibships, Sengers et al. (1975) described congenital cataract and mitochondrial myopathy of skeletal and heart muscle. Cardiomyopathy of hypertrophic type dominated the clinical picture. Histologically, abnormality of mitochondria and storage of lipid and glycogen were found in both skeletal and heart muscle. When the patients performed submaximal exercise for 60 minutes, they developed lactic acidemia. All 3 families originated from the southeast region of the Netherlands. |Cruysberg et al. (1986) studied 12 patients from 6 unrelated families. The patients had bilateral and total cataract in the first weeks of life, underwent cataract surgery, and developed nystagmus and strabismus. They were mentally normal. Cardiomyopathy was progressive and the cause of premature death. Three of the 12 patients died in the neonatal period and 6 in early adulthood. The oldest living patient was 37 years old. The authors recommended that patients avoid heavy exercise. Lalive d'Epinay et al. (1986) described the disorder in 3 children from 2 unrelated families in Switzerland. Infantile cataract, which was the primary symptom at the age of 3 months, progressed quickly and necessitated surgery. Muscular hypotonia and delayed motor development were conspicuous. A distinctive feature was the development of marked lactic acidemia on slight muscular exercise. |Valsson et al. (1988) reported 6 affected persons in 3 Icelandic families which were remotely related. One of their patients, aged 17 years, showed no signs of muscular weakness despite easy fatigability. Morava et al. (2004) reported 2 sibs who had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, infantile cataracts, and delayed motor development associated with lactic acidosis. One patient had intermittent 3-methylglutaconic aciduria. One had severe hypotonia, both had exercise intolerance, and both showed normal development in later childhood. Biochemical studies showed a defect in multiple mitochondrial oxidative enzymes and decreased levels of mitochondrial adenine nucleotide translocator-1 (ANT1) protein (SLC25A4; 103220) in muscle. |Di Rosa et al. (2006) reported 5 unrelated patients with infantile onset of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, cataracts, and hypotonia, consistent with Sengers syndrome. All had increased 3-methylglutaconic aciduria and lactic acidosis. Three patients died before age 2 years, and the 2 surviving children showed mental retardation. The authors noted that the phenotype was more severe than usually reported in Sengers syndrome, and suggested a mitochondrial defect. |Calvo et al. (2012) reported a girl who presented at age 9 months with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy and cardiac failure associated with metabolic lactic acidosis. She later had generalized muscle weakness and delayed motor development with normal cognitive development. She had multiple episodes of cardiac failure in childhood, but the cardiomyopathy was not progressive. At age 11 years, she became wheelchair-bound due to muscle weakness. Other features included early-onset cataract and aphakic glaucoma. During high school, she showed some cognitive decline, and developed osteopenia and premature ovarian failure. Sudden death from cardiac arrest during a viral illness occurred at age 18 years. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed decreased cytochrome oxidase staining, lipid vacuoles, and subsarcolemmal accumulation of abnormally shaped mitochondria. A second unrelated infant, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, developed respiratory distress and circulatory failure in the first hour of life, associated with severe metabolic lactic acidosis. Studies suggested persistent pulmonary hypertension. Other features included bilateral cataracts and thrombocytopenia. The patient died at age 3 days. Skeletal muscle biopsies of the 2 patients reported by Calvo et al. (2012) showed combined deficiencies of mitochondrial complexes I, III, and IV and severe mtDNA depletion (4% and 13% of normal, respectively). |Mayr et al. (2012) reported 5 patients, including 2 sibs, with Sengers syndrome and provided follow-up of 7 previously reported patients. Although all had congenital cataracts and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, the phenotype was highly variable in terms of severity, survival, and biochemical alterations. Six of 12 patients had a combined deficiency of respiratory chain complexes in muscle, whereas 5 had normal results. Five patients died before age 12 months, whereas the oldest was alive at age 41 years. Most had muscle hypotonia, exercise intolerance, and lactic acidosis associated with exercise. The most severely affected patient was a boy who presented in the first weeks of life with congenital cataracts, hypotonia, decompensated massive cardiomyopathy, and tachydyspnea associated with increased serum lactate. He died of cardiac failure on day 18 of life. Muscle biopsy showed mild myopathic changes, fine lipid droplets, and a defect of complexes I, II, III, and V of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, as well as impaired ATP synthesis. A patient reported by Di Rosa et al. (2006) was 12 years old. Her cardiac condition was relatively stable under therapy, but her muscle weakness had progressively worsened, and she was wheelchair-bound for longer distances. She also had poor growth, but no sign of central nervous system involvement; brain MRI was normal. A younger brother, who had bilateral cataracts, had died at age 14 months as a result of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Muscle biopsy showed diffuse complex IV deficiency with numerous ragged-red fibers. |
182125::Sepiapterin reductase (7,8-dihydrobiopterin:NADP+ oxidoreductase; EC 1.1.1.153) catalyzes the NADPH-dependent reduction of various carbonyl substances, including derivatives of pteridines, and belongs to a group of enzymes called aldo-keto reductases. SPR plays an important role in the biosynthesis of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4).|
201470::the disorder is caused by mutation in the gene encoding short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (ACADS; 606885).|SCAD deficiency is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder of fatty acid beta-oxidation. Clinical features are variable: a severe form of the disorder can cause infantile onset of acidosis and neurologic impairment, whereas some patients develop only myopathy. With the advent of screening for inborn errors of metabolism, patients with putative pathogenic mutations but who remain asymptomatic have also been identified (summary by Shirao et al., 2010). |Two distinct clinical phenotypes of hereditary short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency have been identified. One type has been observed in infants with acute acidosis and muscle weakness; the other has been observed in middle-aged patients with chronic myopathy. SCAD deficiency is generalized in the former type and localized to skeletal muscles in the latter. Cases with neonatal onset have a variable phenotype that includes metabolic acidosis, failure to thrive, developmental delay, and seizures, as well as myopathy (Roe and Ding, 2001). There are no episodes of nonketotic hypoglycemia, which are characteristic of medium-chain (MCAD; 607008) and very long-chain (VLCAD; 201475) acyl dehydrogenase deficiencies.|Amendt et al. (1987) described 2 unrelated patients, both of whom presented with neonatal metabolic acidosis and ethylmalonate excretion. Deficiency of short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase was demonstrated in fibroblasts by both an electron-transfer flavoprotein (ETF)-linked dye-reduction assay and a tritium release ADH assay. |Coates et al. (1988) demonstrated deficiency of SCAD in a 2-year-old female whose early postnatal life was complicated by poor feeding, emesis, and failure to thrive. She demonstrated progressive skeletal muscle weakness and developmental delay. Her plasma total carnitine level was low-normal, but was esterified to an abnormal degree. The same was true for skeletal muscle carnitine. Fibroblasts from this patient had 50% of control levels of acyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity towards butyryl-CoA as substrate. All of this residual activity was inhibited by an antibody against medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase. These data demonstrated that medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase accounted for 50% of the activity towards the short-chain substrate, butyryl-CoA, under these conditions, but that antibody against that enzyme could be used to unmask the specific and virtually complete deficiency of short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase in this patient. |Bhala et al. (1995) summarized the clinical and biochemical features of 6 cases of SCAD deficiency, including the only 4 authentic cases that they were able to identify in the literature. In contrast to MCAD and LCAD deficiency, they found no evidence of secondary carnitine deficiency, and further found that hypoglycemia may not be a prominent clinical feature. All patients with SCAD had neurologic deficits: hypotonia/hypertonia, hyperactivity, and/or developmental delay. |Ribes et al. (1998) reported mild or absent clinical manifestations in monozygous twin sisters with SCAD deficiency. One twin developed hypotonia and decreased level of consciousness following an upper respiratory infection at 5 months. The other was essentially asymptomatic. Ethylmalonic acid was persistently, although sometimes only slightly, increased in both. SCAD activity was 25% and 16% of control levels. Immunoblot analysis in cultured skin fibroblasts indicated that SCAD protein was of normal size, but was less than 10% of control cell intensity. |Tein et al. (1999) described a novel phenotype of multicore myopathy and ophthalmoplegia (see 255320) in a 13.5-year-old Israeli girl in whom there was no detectable SCAD protein on Western blot analysis. Decreased fetal movements as well as facial weakness and a fish mouth were noted at birth. Hypotonia was observed at 3 months of age. She became wheelchair dependent at age 5 years, with proximal weakness with wasting and contractures, arreflexia, ptosis, progressive external ophthalmoplegia, and cataracts. At age 10 she developed transient heart failure. Intelligence, sensation, cerebellar function, and plantar responses were normal. |Gregersen et al. (1998) investigated ethylmalonic aciduria in a Spanish girl and an African American male, as well as in 133 patients with elevated ethylmalonic acid excretion. They concluded that ethylmalonic aciduria, a commonly detected biochemical phenotype, is a complex multifactorial/polygenic condition where, in addition to the emerging role of SCAD susceptibility alleles, other genetic and environmental factors are involved. Corydon et al. (2001) came to the same conclusion based on their study of 10 patients with ethylmalonic aciduria. |Tein et al. (2008) reported 10 children of Ashkenazi Jewish descent with variable phenotypic expression of SCAD deficiency. Common clinical features included hypotonia, developmental delay, speech delay, myopathy, lethargy, and feeding difficulties. Muscle biopsy was performed in 3 patients and showed 2 with histologic features of multiminicore myopathy and 1 with lipid storage disease. Laboratory abnormalities included ethylmalonic aciduria and methylsuccinic aciduria, as well as increased serum acyl carnitines. |Baerlocher et al. (1997) stated that up until 1996 about 10 patients in whom SCAD enzyme deficiency could be confirmed in fibroblasts had been described. Both the clinical and the biochemical pattern of the disease was heterogeneous, with all patients showing at least neuromuscular signs. Baerlocher et al. (1997) presented the case of a 16-year-old patient with growth failure, muscular wasting, and hypotonia since birth. |Turnbull et al. (1984) reported the case of a 53-year-old woman who presented with a lipid-storage myopathy and low concentrations of carnitine in skeletal muscle. Impaired fatty acid oxidation in muscle was found to be caused by deficiency of short-chain acyl-CoA (butyryl-CoA) dehydrogenase activity in mitochondria. The authors suggested that the muscle carnitine deficiency was secondary to this enzyme deficiency and urged that it be considered in other cases of lipid-storage myopathy with carnitine deficiency (212160). Onset of myopathy was at age 46 years. The patient described by Turnbull et al. (1984) had normal SCADH activity in fibroblasts, which raises the possibility that a distinct SCADH isoenzyme exists in mammalian muscle. However, Amendt et al. (1992) found that in mice SCAD is the same in both muscle and fibroblasts. For that reason, Bhala et al. (1995) proposed that the case of Turnbull et al. (1984) was not a primary case of SCAD deficiency but rather a case of riboflavin-responsive multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, as reported by DiDonato et al. (1989). |Pedersen et al. (2008) observed clinical variation among 114 patients with SCAD deficiency ranging in age from 0 to 50 years. Twenty-nine patients (25%) showed some clinical symptoms on the first day of life, 70 (61%) were identified within the first year of life, and only 4 (4%) were more than 10 years of age when diagnosed. The 12 most frequent symptoms were: developmental delay, speech delay, hypotonia, failure to thrive, feeding difficulties, seizures, dysmorphic features, hypoglycemic encephalopathy, microcephaly, optic atrophy, muscular hypertonia, and lethargy. Hierarchical cluster analysis was performed on clinical data from 29 patients presenting with 3 or 4 of the most frequent symptoms and revealed 3 prominent symptom groups: (1) failure to thrive with feeding difficulties and hypotonia as the most characteristic features (23 patients; 20%), (2) developmental delay and seizures (29 patients; 25%), and (3) developmental delay and hypotonia without seizures (34 patients; 30%). A fourth symptom group consisting of 16 patients (14%) showed failure to thrive, developmental delay, and hypotonia. The remaining 8 patients (7%) had a heterogeneous mixture of other symptoms including dysmorphic features, myopathy, cardiomyopathy, hepatic steatosis, respiratory distress, and intrauterine growth retardation, while 4 were reported to have no symptoms. Molecular analysis identified 29 different mutations in the ACADS gene, but there were no clear genotype/phenotype correlations. Pedersen et al. (2008) suggested that pathogenic ACADS protein misfolding is necessary, but not sufficient, for expression of the disease. |Shirao et al. (2010) reported unrelated Japanese girls with biochemical evidence of SCAD deficiency detected by newborn screening. However, neither girl had clinical symptoms at age 4 years. Each girl carried compound heterozygous missense mutations in the ACADS gene (606885.0014-606880.0016) that were demonstrated in vitro to have less than 10% residual enzyme activity. Shirao et al. (2010) noted that the genotype/phenotype correlation was unclear. |
610006::short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SBCADD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (ACADSB; 600301).|2-Methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (MBD) deficiency is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder of impaired isoleucine degradation. It is most often ascertained via newborn screening and is usually clinically asymptomatic, although some patients have been reported to have delayed development and neurologic signs. Therefore, the clinical relevance of the deficiency is unclear (Sass et al.., 2008). |Andresen et al. (2000) reported a 3-year-old boy, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, who showed increasing hypotonia and delayed motor development in the second year of life. He also had generalized muscle atrophy and strabismus. Urinary organic acid analysis detected isolated 2-methylbutyryl glycinuria suggestive of a defect in isoleucine catabolism. Enzyme assay of the patient's fibroblasts, using 2-methylbutyryl-CoA as substrate, confirmed the defect. Although both parents and 2 sibs were asymptomatic, the mother was shown also to excrete 2-methylbutyryl glycine. |Gibson et al. (2000) reported an American boy of northern European and Eritrean descent with SBCADD. Although pregnancy and birth were normal, the infant was readmitted at age 3 days for poor feeding, lethargy, hypothermia, hypoglycemia, and episodes of apnea. Brain MRI showed bilateral areas of subacute ischemia involving the occipital and parietal lobes, consistent with global hypoxia. A female fetus in a subsequent pregnancy was found to be affected. |Madsen et al. (2006) provided follow-up on the patients reported by Gibson et al. (2000). At age 6 years, the boy showed severe developmental delay and epilepsy. He also had microcephaly and left eye exotropia. By contrast, his younger sister showed no clinical symptoms and normal development at age 4 years. The mother took supplemental carnitine during the second pregnancy, and the girl had been treated with carnitine and a low-protein diet since birth. |Madsen et al. (2006) reported an affected child from Somalia. He had 2 episodes of apnea at age 6 weeks and seizures at age 6 months. At age 12 months, he had global developmental delay, hypotonia, and poor eye contact. |Sass et al. (2008) reported 6 patients, including 2 sets of sibs, with SBCADD confirmed by genetic analysis (T148I; 600301.0004 and E387K; 600301.0005). The patients were of Turkish or Lebanese Arab origin. None of the patients had clinical symptoms, and the 3 probands were all ascertained by newborn screening. For the 3 probands, development was normal at age 3, 6, and 6 years, respectively, even without treatment. In vitro studies of patient fibroblasts confirmed an impairment in isoleucine degradation. Sass et al. (2008) stated that most individuals with this trait have been asymptomatic, and that the few reported with clinical symptoms (Gibson et al., 2000; Madsen et al., 2006) may have reflected ascertainment bias. However, Sass et al. (2008) noted that special attention may be needed in situations that could stimulate metabolic decompensation. |
603903::sickle cell anemia is the result of mutant beta globin (HBB; 141900) in which the mutation causes sickling of hemoglobin.|Sickle cell anemia is a multisystem disease associated with episodes of acute illness and progressive organ damage. Hemoglobin polymerization, leading to erythrocyte rigidity and vasoocclusion, is central to the pathophysiology of the disease, but the importance of chronic anemia, hemolysis, and vasculopathy has been established. The most common cause of sickle cell anemia is the HbS variant (141900.0243), with hemoglobin SS disease being most prevalent in Africans (review by Rees et al., 2010).See review of infection in sickle cell disease by Booth et al. (2010). |Piel et al. (2017) reviewed the genetic and nongenetic modifiers of the severity of sickle cell disease.|Scriver and Waugh (1930) reported detailed studies of a 7-year old child with sickle cell anemia. Her main complaints were cough, night sweats, vague pains in the legs and joints, occasional abdominal pain, poor appetite, and increasing fatigue. In a series of clever experiments that involved taking venous blood from the arm under different circumstances, the authors showed a correlation between oxygen tension and sickling of the red blood cells in vivo. Increased sickling was observed when oxygen pressure fell below 40 to 45 mm Hg. Scriver and Waugh (1930) concluded that large aggregations of sickle cells seen in sinuses, vessels, and organs of sickle cell patients at autopsy reflected lowered oxygen tension resulting from death. |In many children with sickle cell anemia, functional asplenia develops during the first year of life and septicemia is the leading cause of death in childhood. The risk of septicemia in sickle cell anemia is greatest during the first 3 years of life and is reduced markedly by prophylactic penicillin therapy. Less is known about splenic dysfunction and the risk of overwhelming sepsis in children with sickle cell-hemoglobin C disease (see HbC; 141900.0038), although functional asplenia has been documented by radionuclide liver-spleen scans in some adult patients (Ballas et al., 1982) and an elevated erythrocyte pit count, a finding that indicates functional asplenia in children with sickle cell anemia, also has been found in some children with SC disease (Pearson et al., 1985). Lane et al. (1994) reported 7 fatal cases of pneumococcal septicemia in children with SC disease. The earliest death occurred in a 1-year-old child who had cyanotic congenital heart; the other children were aged 3.5 to 15 years. Only 1 child had received pneumococcal vaccine or prophylactic penicillin therapy. All 7 children had an acute febrile illness and rapid deterioration despite parenterally administered antibiotic therapy and intensive medical support. Erythrocyte pit counts in 2 patients were 40.3 and 41.7%, respectively (normal, less than 3.6%). Autopsy findings in 5 cases included splenic congestion without infarction in 5, splenomegaly in 4, and bilateral adrenal hemorrhage in 3. Lane et al. (1994) concluded that pneumococcal vaccine should be administered in all children with SC disease. The routine use of prophylactic penicillin therapy in infants and children with SC disease remained controversial. |Morris et al. (1991) reported hematologic findings in 181 patients, aged 40 to 73 years, with hemoglobin SS disease. The studies showed a downward age-related trend in hemoglobin and platelets and falling reticulocyte count consistent with progressive bone marrow failure which could not be explained by renal impairment. Kodish et al. (1991) concluded that despite current rates of mortality and morbidity with bone marrow transplantation, a substantial minority of parents of children with sickle cell disease would consent to bone marrow transplantation for their children. |Adams (1995) reviewed the literature on sickle cell disease and stroke. Previous studies had shown clinically evident cerebral vascular disease in 7 to 8% of cohorts followed during the first 2 weeks of life. However, MRI series demonstrated 11 to 24% of cerebral vascular accidents in patients with sickle cell disease, indicating a large proportion of silent infarctions. |The defect in urine concentrating ability in persons with sickle cell trait is thought to result from intracellular polymerization of Hb S in erythrocytes, leading to microvascular occlusion, in the vasa recta of the renal medulla. Reasoning that the severity of the concentration defect might be related to the percentage of sickle hemoglobin present in erythrocytes, Gupta et al. (1991) studied urine concentrating ability in 3 classes of A/S individuals, those with a normal alpha-globin genotype and those who were either heterozygous or homozygous for the gene-deletion type of alpha-thalassemia. They found a correlation between urine concentrating ability and the percentage of sickle hemoglobin, which was highest in the individuals with normal alpha-globin genotype and lowest in those homozygous for the deletion. |Steinberg (1989) described a 73-year-old black man in Mississippi who had hematologically and genotypically typical sickle cell anemia with, however, very mild clinical manifestations. He had had cholecystectomy for asymptomatic cholelithiasis at the age of about 47. He had had partial priapism. In a large study involving 2,590 patients over 5 years of age at entry and followed for an average of 5.6 years, Milner et al. (1991) found an overall prevalence of osteonecrosis of the femoral head of about 10%. Patients with the hemoglobin SS genotype and alpha-thalassemia and those with frequent painful crises were at highest risk. Osteonecrosis was found in patients as young as 5 years old. |Steinberg et al. (1995) presented 5 cases of sickle cell anemia in individuals in their 70s. They concluded that 'We do not understand why some patients with sickle cell anemia survive their peers by decades just as we have little insight into why occasional normal individuals live far beyond the average number of years.' Sickle cell patients that express gamma-globin at 10 to 20% of the level of sickle globin in most of their red blood cells have greatly improved clinical prognoses (Lan et al., 1998). |Langdown et al. (1989) described a doubly substituted sickling hemoglobin, called HbS (Oman) (141900.0245). The higher expressors of HbS (Oman) had a sickle cell anemia clinical syndrome of moderate intensity, whereas the lower expressors had no clinical syndrome and were comparable to the solitary case first described in Oman. |Popp et al. (1997) stated that the sickle cell anemia syndrome produced by HbS Antilles (141900.0244) is a more severe phenotype than that produced by HbS. Humans heterozygous for HbS have RBCs that contain approximately 40% HbS, but do not exhibit clinical symptoms of sickle cell disease. In comparison, humans heterozygous for HbS Antilles have RBCs that contain approximately 40% HbS Antilles, but these individuals exhibit clinical symptoms of sickle cell disease that are similar in severity to those in persons who are homozygous for HbS. This is because Hb S Antilles is less soluble and has a right shift in its oxygen association-dissociation curve, properties that favor deoxygenation and polymerization of Hb S Antilles. |Rey et al. (1991) described sickle cell/hemoglobin E (SE) disease (141900.0071) in 3 black American children of Haitian origin. They pointed out that the disorder is probably more benign than SC disease, SC (Arab) disease (141900.0202), and SC (Harlem) disease (141900.0039), all of which have increased risk of the complications of sickling including pneumococcal sepsis. |Walker et al. (2000) studied the prevalence, incidence, risk factors, clinical associations, and morbidity of gallstones in 311 patients with homozygous sickle cell disease and 167 patients with sickle cell-hemoglobin C disease in a cohort studied from birth. Gallstones developed in 96 patients with hemoglobin SS disease and 18 patients with SC disease; specific symptoms necessitating cholecystectomy occurred in only 7 patients with homozygous SS disease. |Adler et al. (2001) described a patient with mild HbSC disease who, after administration of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (GCSF; 138970) for collection of peripheral stem cells, developed sickle cell crisis and died within 36 hours. The case strongly suggested a role for granulocytes in acute sickle cell complications and a need for caution in the use of GCSF in this disorder. The patient was a 47-year-old African American woman who had learned she had HbSC disease only 6 weeks earlier. She had no history of sickle cell crisis. HbSC disease was diagnosed after a hemoglobinopathy evaluation at the time of HLA typing, done in preparation for her to become a stem cell donor for her sister, who had chronic myeloid leukemia and mild HbSC disease. The patient was the only sib and had a 6 of 6 antigen match. |Thomas et al. (2000) presented growth curves for children aged 0-18 years with homozygous sickle cell disease. These were derived from 315 participants in a longitudinal cohort study in Kingston, Jamaica. |Ashley-Koch et al. (2001) performed population-based surveillance of children aged 3 to 10 years from metropolitan Atlanta to determine if stroke-related neurologic damage in children with sickle cell disease is associated with developmental disabilities. Children with sickle cell disease had an increased risk for developmental disabilities of 3.2, with a P value of less than 0.0001, particularly mental retardation (RR = 2.7, P = 0.0005) and cerebral palsy (RR = 10.8, P less than 0.0001). This risk was confined to developmental disabilities associated with stroke (RR = 130, P less than 0.0001; for developmental disabilities without stroke the relative risk was only 1.3 with a P value of 0.23). |Gladwin et al. (2004) demonstrated that pulmonary hypertension, diagnosed by doppler echocardiography, is common in adults with sickle cell disease. It appears to be a complication of chronic hemolysis, is resistant to hydroxyurea therapy, and confers a high risk of death. |Priapism, although uncommon in the general population, is one of the most serious complications associated with sickle cell disease. Nolan et al. (2005) assembled 273 patients with sickle cell disease and priapism and 979 control subjects with sickle cell disease and no priapism. Case subjects, compared with controls, had significantly lower hemoglobin levels, higher levels of lactate dehydrogenase, bilirubin, and aspartate aminotransferase, and higher reticulocyte, white blood cell, and platelet counts. The findings suggested an association of priapism with increased hemolysis. Hemolysis decreases the availability of circulating nitric oxide, which plays an important role in erectile function. |Gladwin (2005) discussed the hemolytic subphenotype of sickle cell disease. He pointed out that hemolytic anemia, while silent from a vasoocclusive pain crisis standpoint, leads to sustained nitric oxide depletion, oxidant stress, vasoconstriction, and proliferative vasculopathy in a number of organ systems, ultimately contributing to the development of priapism, cutaneous leg ulceration, pulmonary hypertension, sudden death, and possibly stroke.|
210250::sitosterolemia is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ABCG8 gene (605460) or in the ABCG5 gene (605459), both of which are located on chromosome 2p21.|Sitosterolemia, also known as phytosterolemia, is an autosomal recessive metabolic condition characterized by unrestricted intestinal absorption of both cholesterol and plant-derived cholesterol-like molecules, such as sitosterol. Patients with this disorder have very high levels of plant sterols in the plasma and develop tendon and tuberous xanthomas, accelerated atherosclerosis, and premature coronary artery disease (summary by Berge et al., 2000). |Bhattacharyya and Connor (1974) described 2 intellectually normal sisters of German and German-Swiss ancestry with tendinous and tuberous xanthoma and elevation of beta-sitosterol and 2 other plant sterols, campesterol and stigmasterol, in the blood. The authors proposed abnormally increased intestinal absorption. One of the 2 sisters complained of pains in the knees and ankles. |Shulman et al. (1976) pointed out that a diet high in vegetable oils (containing beta-sitosterol), prescribed to increase dietary polyunsaturated fat, could aggravate this condition. Khachadurian and Clancy (1978) observed phytosterolemia in 5 patients from 2 families. |Miettinen (1980) reported a patient with phytosterolaemia and hypersplenism who developed premature atherosclerotic arterial disease requiring a 3-vessel coronary bypass at the age of 29 years. The patient had initially been diagnosed with familial hypercholesterolaemia (143890), but did not have increased serum cholesterol levels. Biochemical studies showed that up to 30% of serum and bile sterols were plant sterols, including campesterol and beta-sitosterol, stigmasterol, and another major plant sterol, tentatively identified as avenasterol. Fecal analysis showed decreased biliary secretion of plant sterols. Treatment with cholestyramine brought about a modest increase in cholesterol elimination as bile acids, increased endogenous cholesterol synthesis, and reduced the plasma cholesterol by 21% and plant sterols by 16%. |Wang et al. (1981) reported an adult Chinese man with sitosterolemia who presented with tendinous and tuberous xanthomatosis and severe coronary artery disease. He also had chronic hemolytic anemia with stomatocytic erythrocytes. |Patients with phytosterolemia reported by Miettinen (1980), Wang et al. (1981), and Skrede et al. (1985) had episodic hemolysis or chronic hemolytic anemia. Increased content of sitosterol in red cells was believed to be responsible for their fragility. |Hatanaka et al. (1990) described spinal cord compression with paraplegia in a patient with xanthomas due to normocholesterolemic sitosterolemia. |Rios et al. (2010) reported an 11-month old Romanian girl in whom sitosterolemia became evident after she was weaned from an exclusive breast milk diet. |Mediterranean Stomatocytosis/Macrothrombocytopenia|Ducrou and Kimber (1969) reported individuals of Mediterranean descent living in Australia who had recurrent abdominal pain and splenomegaly associated with stomatocytosis and reduced red cell life. Also among individuals of Mediterranean descent in Australia, Von Behrens (1975) found decreased platelet counts and increased platelet volume. The authors concluded that the macrothrombocytopenia was a benign morphologic variant. The individuals were Italian and Greek immigrants to Australia. This condition was referred to as 'Mediterranean stomatocytosis/macrothrombocytopenia (Rees et al., 2005; Stewart et al., 2006). |In correspondence, Stewart et al. (2006) and Stewart and Makris (2008) noted that there were no reports of stomatocytosis/macrothrombocytopenia in any Mediterranean countries, such as Italy or Greece, that there were no further reports of this condition after 1975, and that there was no clear evidence of autosomal dominant inheritance. These authors thus suggested that the cases of Mediterranean stomatocytosis/macrothrombocytopenia reported in Australia were acquired, and possibly the result of ingestion of local olive oil in Adelaide that may have contained some kind of impurity that inhibited the ABCG5 or ABCG8 proteins, or that the olive oil used at that time contained some kind of active molecule related to phytosterols. |Despite the assertion by Stewart and Makris (2008) that no reports of this condition appeared after 1975, Paulus and Casals (1978) reported peculiarities in megakaryocytes in persons with Mediterranean macrothrombocytopenia. The mean platelet counts in Mediterranean and northern European subjects were 161,000 and 219,000 per ml, respectively, and the mean platelet volumes were 17.8 and 12.4 fl, respectively. Brahimi et al. (1984) concluded that the prevalence of Mediterranean macrothrombocytopenia was low in Algeria. |Savoia et al. (2001) identified a common heterozygous mutation in the GP1BA gene (A156V; 606672.0004) in affected individuals from 6 of 12 Italian families believed to have Mediterranean macrothrombocytopenia. Stomatocytosis was not reported. These findings were consistent with a rare occurrence of autosomal dominant Bernard-Soulier syndrome (153670). However, the remaining 6 Italian families reported by Savoia et al. (2001) did not have GP1BA mutations, suggesting genetic heterogeneity. Molecular studies of the ABCG5 or ABCG8 genes were not performed. |Rees et al. (2005) presented molecular evidence that the stomatocytosis and macrothrombocytopenia observed in so-called Mediterranean stomatocytosis/macrothrombocytopenia actually represents the hematologic presentation of phytosterolemia. They reported 5 kindreds with a recessive condition characterized by mild hemolysis, marked stomatocytosis, low levels of very large platelets, and increased mean platelet volume, consistent with the description of the Mediterranean condition. However, none of the patients were of Mediterranean extraction. All patients had evidence of hemolysis with reticulocytosis, mild hyperbilirubinemia, and splenomegaly. All also had short stature. Some patients presented with abdominal pain, and some had a bleeding tendency. None of the patients had evidence of premature cardiovascular disease, but all were of a young age (less than 30 years). Patient platelets showed a consistent abnormality in ristocetin-induced agglutination, with variable aggregation in response to other agonists. Other forms of hereditary stomatocytosis (see, e.g., 185000 and 194380) were ruled out. Spectroscopic analysis of erythrocyte membrane lipids showed abnormal and increased levels of plant-derived phytosterols, including beta-sitosterol, stigmasterol, isofucosterol, stigmastanol, and campesterol. Plasma levels of phytosterols were also increased. All affected individuals in the families reported by Rees et al. (2005) had mutations in either the ABCG5 (2 families; see, e.g., 605459.0006) or the ABCG8 (3 families; see, e.g., 605460.0001) gene. These studies showed that the hematologic syndrome of Mediterranean stomatocytosis can result from an excess of plasma phytosterols, perhaps due to abnormal lipid content in red cell and platelet membranes. |Rees et al. (2005) predicted that the phenotype is highly dependent on diet, and it is therefore difficult to make convincing phenotype/genotype correlations. The studies also revealed increasing clinical diversity, both in the laboratory and clinical features of sitosterolemia. The Mediterranean population of Australia is renowned for its profuse olive oil consumption, and it is possible that the hematology observed in that population was the result of an environmental or dietary effect, which may have disappeared with time. Whatever the explanation for the Australian experience, the results of Rees et al. (2005) indicated that plasma phytosterols should be measured in patients with stomatocytic hemolysis and abnormally large platelets. In addition, platelet size should be reviewed in all patients with hypercholesterolemia. |
270200::Sjogren-Larsson syndrome (SLS) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ALDH3A2 gene (609523), which encodes fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase (FALDH), on chromosome 17p11.|Sjogren-Larsson syndrome is an autosomal recessive, early childhood-onset disorder characterized by ichthyosis, mental retardation, spastic paraparesis, macular dystrophy, and leukoencephalopathy. It is caused by deficiency of fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase (summary by Lossos et al., 2006). |The skin changes in Sjogren-Larsson syndrome are similar to those of congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (242100), although considerable variations in severity have been described (Goldsmith et al., 1971). Link and Roldan (1958) reported cases. Blumel et al. (1958) referred to the neurologic disorder as spastic quadriplegia. Sjogren (1956) and Sjogren and Larsson (1957) suggested that all of their 28 cases were derived from the same mutation, which occurred about 600 years ago, and that about 1.3% of the population of northern Sweden is heterozygous for the gene. About half the cases have pigmentary degeneration of the retina. Lesions of the ocular fundus were discussed by Gilbert et al. (1968). Retinal glistening white dots are characteristic. Ecchymoses are present at birth or soon after. Most of the patients never walk. Stature tends to be short. About half the patients have seizures. Clinical improvement occurs with fat restriction and supplementation with medium chain triglycerides. |Rayner et al. (1978) described 2 brothers and a sister with a syndrome combining many of the features of the Sjogren-Larsson syndrome but possibly distinct. They reviewed the group of disorders sharing phenotypic features with the Sjogren-Larsson syndrome. This Sjogren syndrome is sometimes called the T. Sjogren syndrome to distinguish it from the sicca syndrome (see 200400, 270150), which was described by Henrick Sjogren, Swedish ophthalmologist born in 1899. |Jagell and Linden (1982) studied all 36 SLS patients alive in Sweden in 1980. Slight or moderate hyperkeratosis, less pronounced on the face, was already present at birth, but collodion membranes were never seen. Ichthyosis developed to its full extent during infancy. The skin changes were concentrated on the neck and lower abdomen and in the flexures, where the scales were often dark. Hair and nails and ability to sweat were unaffected. Glistening spots in the ocular fundus were an obligatory and early sign in all 30 examined Swedish patients with Sjogren-Larsson syndrome (Jagell et al., 1980). |In northern Norway, Gedde-Dahl et al. (1984) encountered a family in which 3 sibs had a form of ichthyosis very similar to that of the Sjogren-Larsson syndrome but with none of the associated neurologic features; see 270220.|Willemsen et al. (2000) studied 15 patients with Sjogren-Larsson syndrome with proven fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase deficiency and found that all had juvenile macular dystrophy of the retina. The patients exhibited highly characteristic bilateral, glistening yellow-white retinal dots from the age of 1 to 2 years onward. The number of dots increased with age. The extent of the macular abnormality did not correlate with the severity of the ichthyosis or with the severity of the neurologic abnormalities. A high percentage of patients showed additional ocular signs and symptoms, notably marked photophobia. |Cultured skin fibroblasts from SLS patients show impaired hexadecanol oxidation due to deficiency of fatty alcohol: NAD+ oxidoreductase. The deficiency in patients and heterozygotes can also be detected by studying leukocytes (Rizzo et al., 1987). Rizzo et al. (1988) studied lipid metabolism in cultured skin fibroblasts. Intact SLS fibroblasts incubated in the presence of labeled palmitate accumulated more radioactive hexadecanol than did normal cells, whereas incorporation of radioactivity into other cellular lipids was unaltered. The hexadecanol content of SLS fibroblasts was abnormally elevated. Rizzo et al. (1988) showed that fatty alcohol:NAD+ oxidoreductase, the enzyme catalyzing the oxidation of hexadecanol to fatty acid, was deficient in SLS fibroblasts. Mean activity was 13% of that in normal fibroblasts. Fibroblasts from 2 obligate heterozygotes had intermediate levels of enzyme activity. In a later report, Rizzo et al. (1989) described studies of fatty alcohol metabolism in 8 patients and 9 obligate heterozygotes. |Lossos et al. (2006) reported follow-up on 6 sibs with SLS from a consanguineous Arab family previously reported by Rogers et al. (1995). The sibs ranged in age from 16 to 36 years. They all exhibited typical features of the disorder but severity with no apparent age correlation. Although there was some evidence for progression of macular degeneration, cutaneous and neurologic features were not progressive. Cerebral magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) showed a decrease in the 1.3-ppm lipid peak among the older sibs, suggesting reduced disease activity. Lossos et al. (2006) suggested the presence of compensatory factors to explain the clinical variability among sibs with the same mutation. |Jack et al. (2015) characterized the retinal findings in 9 patients, ranging in age from 3 to 23 years, with SLS and ALDH3A2 mutations. All 9 exhibited generalized ichthyosis, spastic diplegia, photophobia, ichthyosis of the upper eyelid skin, and glistening macular crystals. Optical coherence tomography in 14 eyes of 7 patients showed that macular crystals were present in all layers, but predominantly in the inner nuclear and outer plexiform layers. Full retinal thickness was reduced by 22%, the inner nuclear layer was reduced by 30%, and the outer nuclear layer was reduced by 40%. Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) and fluorescein angiography (FA) showed retinal pigment epithelium atrophy. All 4 patients imaged with FAF showed heterogeneous macular autofluorescence with crystals. All 4 eyes evaluated with FA had window defects and crystals without the presence of leakage or an enlarged foveal avascular zone. |
270400::Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding sterol delta-7-reductase (DHCR7; 602858), which maps to chromosome 11q13.|Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome is an autosomal recessive multiple congenital malformation and mental retardation syndrome. Although historically a clinical distinction was often made between a classic 'type I' disorder and a more severe 'type II' disorder, in reality the syndrome constitutes a clinical and biochemical continuum from mild to severe (Opitz et al., 1987; Cunniff et al., 1997; Kelley, 1998). |The discovery of the deficiency of 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase as a causative factor of the SLO syndrome (Tint et al., 1994) made this syndrome the first true metabolic syndrome of multiple congenital malformations. A multidisciplinary National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) conference of the SLO syndrome reviewed different implications of this discovery and proposed further studies in this field. A detailed report on this conference and abstracts of presentations were provided by Opitz and de la Cruz (1994). Observations presented at an NICHD RSH/SLOS conference in September 1995 were reviewed by Kelley (1997). Kelley (1998) referred to SLOS as a metabolic malformation syndrome, but suggested that this may be an exception. Most mutations that had been related to multiple congenital malformation syndromes, i.e., disturbances of the body plan, have not been disorders of intermediary metabolism but, instead, mutations of homeobox genes and other transcriptional regulators and signaling systems. |Opitz et al. (1987) gave a presumedly complete bibliography of the SLO syndrome, which was updated by Opitz et al. (1994) and included almost 200 references. They concluded that lumping SLO syndrome with the Pallister-Hall hamartoblastoma syndrome (PHS; 146510) is not justified. In a given severe case, differentiation from the Meckel syndrome (249000) may be a challenge. |Herman (2003) reviewed the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway and the 6 disorders involving enzyme defects in post-squalene cholesterol biosynthesis: SLOS, desmosterolosis (602398), X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia punctata (CDPX2; 302960), CHILD syndrome (308050), lathosterolosis (607330), and hydrops-ectopic calcification-moth-eaten skeletal dysplasia (HEM; 215140). |Smith et al. (1964) reported 3 unrelated males with a strikingly similar combination of congenital anomalies: microcephaly, mental retardation, hypotonia, incomplete development of the male genitalia, short nose with anteverted nostrils, and, in 2, pyloric stenosis. A deceased male sib of one of these was probably affected. No parental consanguinity was discovered. Pauli et al. (1997) reassessed 1 of the patients reported by Smith et al. (1964) at age 34 years and described his physical, developmental, and behavioral manifestations. He was indeed found to have a cholesterol biosynthetic defect. A high cholesterol diet had been instituted and appeared to have had a beneficial effect on his behavior. |Pinsky and DiGeorge (1965) reported affected brother and sister. Blair and Martin (1966) also described the condition in brother and sister. The male had hypospadias. Dallaire and Fraser (1966) described affected brothers and noted that blepharoptosis has been a feature of many cases. Lowry et al. (1968) described the combination of micrognathia, polydactyly, and cleft palate, resembling the syndrome known in the German literature as 'Typus Rostockiensis' or 'Ullrich-Feichtiger syndrome' but suggesting the Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome with respect to dermatoglyphics. Hoefnagel et al. (1969) and Fried and Fraser (1972) reported cases in adults. Syndactyly of toes 2 and 3 was said to be a frequent finding (Cowell, 1978). |In 3 infants, including a brother and sister, Rutledge et al. (1984) described what they considered to be a 'new' lethal malformation syndrome. External features were mesomelic dwarfism, micrognathia, V-shaped upper lip, microglossia, thick alveolar ridges, ambiguous genitalia, webbed neck, highly arched palate, clubfeet, fused fontanels, inclusion cysts of the tongue, widely spaced nipples, and digital anomalies. Internal findings included oligopapillary renal hypoplasia, severe congenital heart defect, cerebellar hypoplasia, and pulmonary, laryngeal, and gallbladder hypoplasia. Both affected sibs showed polydactyly. |Donnai et al. (1986) reported 3 unrelated infants with moderate limb shortening, joint contractures, and polydactyly. Two with an XY karyotype showed female external genitalia. Internal anomalies included unilobar lungs, hypoplasia of the anterior part of the tongue, and renal hypoplasia. Donnai et al. (1986) suggested that the disorder in their patients and in those reported by Lowry et al. (1968) and Kohler (1983) was not Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, but a distinct disorder for which they suggested the designation Lowry-Miller-MacLean syndrome. |Curry et al. (1987) gave an extensive review of 19 previously unreported patients with the disorder for which they suggested the designation Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome type II. Eighteen of their 19 patients had postaxial hexadactyly, 16 had congenital heart defects, 13 had cleft palate, and 10 had cataracts. Unusual findings at autopsy included Hirschsprung disease in 5, unilobar lungs in 6, large adrenals in 4, and pancreatic islet cell hyperplasia in 3. Early lethality was common. They found reports of 19 similar cases in the literature. Their report supported autosomal recessive inheritance by occurrence in 1 pair of sibs in their study and the report of recurrence in 3 of the reported families. Belmont et al. (1987) reported 2 cases of severe lethal SLOS. Eight cases of the same condition were described by Le Merrer et al. (1988), who suggested the designation of 'lethal acrodysgenital dwarfism.' Patients had failure to thrive, facial dysmorphism, ambiguous genitalia, syndactyly, postaxial polydactyly, and internal developmental anomalies such as Hirschsprung disease and cardiac and renal malformations. One of their cases showed parental consanguinity, and in another family 2 sibs were affected. |Failure of masculinization in the SLO syndrome was emphasized by Patterson et al. (1983) and by Greene et al. (1984). Ambiguity of the external genitalia is a frequent feature of males. As shown by the case reported by Scarbrough et al. (1986) and 4 previously reported cases, in extreme instances there is complete failure of development of male external genitalia despite normal XY karyotype. This situation is similar to that in camptomelic dysplasia (114290). In a study of cases from the institution at which SLO syndrome was first described, Joseph et al. (1987) reviewed the genitourinary findings and reported upper urinary tract abnormalities in 57% and genital abnormalities in 71%. Bialer et al. (1987) reported a 46,XY infant with SLO syndrome with female external genitalia, intraabdominal testes with epididymides and deferent ducts, and a normally shaped uterus and vagina, polydactyly, cleft palate, and abnormalities of the kidneys, liver, and lungs. They reviewed 121 cases of SLO syndrome from the literature using a scoring system for severity. In 19 multiplex families, the affected sibs were generally similar in their SLOS scores. Overall degree of severity was positively correlated with genital abnormalities in males, polydactyly, and cleft palate. |On the basis of studies of 2 cases of SLOS, McKeever and Young (1990) raised the question of a primary defect in the fetal adrenals resulting in a combination of low maternal estriol levels, sex reversal, and large adrenal glands in the fetus. Complete absence of lipid was observed in the adrenal cortex of 1 case. They suggested that the apparent suppression of maternal adrenal function in late pregnancy might, however, be secondary to fetomaternal transfer of an adrenal steroid that could not be processed normally by the fetal adrenals. |Lachman et al. (1991) described a phenotypic female with SLOS and a 46,XY karyotype. The child also had clinical hypoglycemia with nesidioblastosis of the pancreas and died on the fifth day of life. An unusually high serum testosterone level suggested a possible defect in testosterone conversion to dihydrotestosterone or a deficiency of end-organ receptors for dihydrotestosterone. In an infant with SLO syndrome and 46,XY karyotype but normal internal and external genitalia of the female type, Fukazawa et al. (1992) found all normal sequences on the Y chromosome, using probes for 26 'loci' including SRY, the presumed gene for testis-determining factor (480000). |Cunniff et al. (1997) reported the clinical and biochemical spectra of 80 patients (68 index cases and 12 family members) with abnormally increased levels of 7-dehydrocholesterol. The phenotypic spectrum ranged from isolated syndactyly of toes 2 and 3 to holoprosencephaly and multiple visceral anomalies resulting in death in utero. Plasma cholesterol concentration was inversely correlated with clinical severity. Little relationship was seen between severity score and 7-dehydrocholesterol concentration. However, 10% of patients had normal serum cholesterol concentrations and would have been missed without quantification of 7-dehydrocholesterol. Syndactyly of toes 2 and 3 was found in 79 of the 80 patients. Johnson (1975) reported 2/3 toe syndactyly in only 73% of his 55 SLO syndrome patients. This finding suggested to Cunniff et al. (1997) that as many as one quarter of previously documented SLOS patients may have had a different genetic disorder. |Ryan et al. (1998) reported a review of all known cases of SLOS in the U. K. A total of 86 cases were initially identified with a diagnosis of SLOS, and a group of 49 with proven 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase deficiency were studied. Thirty-five (71%) were male. Twenty-four individuals were alive at the time of study; 20 had died, including 1 stillbirth, and 5 fetuses had been terminated. The frequent occurrence of hypospadias was thought to account for the high percentage of recognized cases being male. Mental retardation was present in 23 of 25 individuals; photosensitivity in 13 of 24; abnormal sleep pattern in 16 of 23; microcephaly in 32 of 40; short or proximally placed thumbs in 24; and congenital cardiac abnormalities in 18, with an atrioventricular septal defect present in 6. The typical facial appearance was found to become less obvious with age, and 20% of cases did not have 2/3 toe syndactyly. Serum 7-dehydrocholesterol levels did not correlate with clinical severity. |Anderson et al. (1998) reported 2 sibs with variant SLOS and atypical sterol metabolism. Both sibs had mild growth retardation, mild developmental delay, ptosis, micrognathia, and mild syndactyly of toes 2 and 3. They both had low plasma cholesterol, but higher than that typically seen in SLOS patients. In addition, they both had only modest elevations of plasma 7-dehydrocholesterol. The parents had higher 7-dehydrocholesterol/cholesterol ratios compared to those of parents of classic SLOS patients. The authors postulated that this milder phenotype with more severe abnormalities of sterol metabolism in patients and parents may represent a phenocopy of classic SLOS. Alternatively, the Southeastern Cherokee ancestry shared by the parents may have affected the phenotype. |Nowaczyk et al. (1998) reported 2 brothers and their female first cousin, all of nonconsanguineous unions, with mild SLOS. All children had moderate mental retardation and syndactyly of toes 2 and 3, but mild facial abnormalities. The brothers had mild ptosis, anteverted nares, mild micrognathia, and normal genitalia. The girl had mild retrognathia and syndactyly of the second and third toes apparent only from the plantar aspect. The authors suggested that the delay in diagnosis for these children, 31 months for the older brother and 11 years for the cousin, was due to lack of knowledge about SLOS among general and developmental pediatricians. They also suggested that the carrier rate of 1 to 2% among northern European Caucasians may be too low. Nowaczyk et al. (2001) reported the DHCR7 mutations in this family. The brothers' father had the rare thr289-to-ile missense mutation (T289I; 602858.0015). The 2 unrelated mothers were carriers of the common IVS8-1G-C (602858.0001) mutation. All 3 affected cousins had the IVS8-1G-C/T289I genotype. The authors suggested that the observed incidence of IVS8-1G-C homozygotes may be underestimated because of prenatal or perinatal lethality. |
182940::susceptibility to the development of neural tube defects (NTDs) is conferred by variation in the VANGL1 (610132), VANGL2 (600533), CELSR1 (604523), or FUZ (610622) genes. An association has been reported with variants in the T locus (601397) on chromosome 6q.|Neural tube defects are the second most common type of birth defect after congenital heart defects. The 2 most common NTDs are open spina bifida, also known as spina bifida cystica (SBC) or myelomeningocele, and anencephaly (206500) (Detrait et al., 2005). Spina bifida occulta (SBO), a bony defect of the spine covered by normal skin, is a mild form of spina bifida that is often asymptomatic. The term 'spinal dysraphia' refers to both SBC and SBO (Botto et al., 1999; Fineman et al., 1982). The most severe neural tube defect, craniorachischisis (CRN), leaves the neural tube open from the midbrain or rostral hindbrain to the base of the spine (summary by Robinson et al., 2012).|Neural tube defects represent a complex trait with multifactorial etiology encompassing both genetic and environmental components (summary by Bartsch et al., 2012 and Lei et al., 2014). |An X-linked form of spina bifida has been suggested; see 301410. See also folate-sensitive neural tube defects (601634), which are caused by genes involved in folate metabolism.|Fineman et al. (1982) studied 4 families in which multiple members had spina bifida cystica and/or spina bifida occulta. Excluding the probands, the frequency of all types of spinal/vertebral defects in family members was found to be 30/58 (52%). Statistical analysis indicated autosomal dominant inheritance with a penetrance of 75%. The authors concluded that both forms of spina bifida are different expressions of the same dominant gene in these kindreds. Spina bifida occulta was present in 15% of 100 control individuals. |Fellous et al. (1982) reported a 5-generation family with spina bifida associated with sacral agenesis (see 600145). Abnormalities ranged from complete absence of the sacrum, with or without spina bifida aperta, to spina bifida occulta. The condition appeared in a man with 4 children who were all affected, and thereafter, to varying degrees, in 17 of his 28 descendants. The authors suggested autosomal dominant inheritance. Linkage analysis suggested a locus on chromosome 6 loci near PGM3 (172100) (lod score = 1.85 at a recombination fraction of 0.087). |Nickel et al. (1994) reported 3 unrelated patients with 22q11 deletion syndrome, 2 with VCFS (192430) and 1 with DiGeorge syndrome (188400), who also had neural tube defects. However, in a follow-up study of 295 patients with spina bifida, Nickel and Magenis (1996) concluded that 22q11 deletion is an infrequent cause of NTD. |Botto et al. (1999) and Detrait et al. (2005) provided reviews of neural tube defects. De Marco et al. (2006) provided a detailed review of neurulation and the possible etiologies of neural tube defects.|
607944::spondyloenchondrodysplasia with immune dysregulation (SPENCDI) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ACP5 gene (171640) on chromosome 19p13.|Spondyloenchondrodysplasia with immune dysregulation (SPENCDI) is an immunoosseous dysplasia combining the typical metaphyseal and vertebral bone lesions of spondyloenchondrodysplasia (SPENCD) with immune dysfunction and neurologic involvement. The skeletal dysplasia is characterized by radiolucent and irregular spondylar and metaphyseal lesions that represent islands of chondroid tissue within bone. The vertebral bodies show dorsally accentuated platyspondyly with disturbance of ossification. Clinical abnormalities such as short stature, rhizomelic micromelia, increased lumbar lordosis, barrel chest, facial anomalies, and clumsy movements may be present (Menger et al., 1989). Central nervous system involvement includes spasticity, mental retardation, and cerebral calcifications, and immune dysregulation ranges from autoimmunity to immunodeficiency. Neurologic and autoimmune manifestations have been observed in different combinations within a single family, suggesting that this disorder may be defined by specific radiographic features but has remarkably pleiotropic manifestations (Renella et al., 2006). Briggs et al. (2016) also noted variability in skeletal, neurologic, and immune phenotypes, which was sometimes marked between members of the same family. |In their classification of the enchondromatoses, Spranger et al. (1978) called Ollier disease and Maffucci syndrome types I and II enchondromatosis, respectively; metachondromatosis (156250), type III; and spondyloenchondrodysplasia (SPENCD), also called spondyloenchondromatosis, type IV; enchondromatosis with irregular vertebral lesions, type V; and generalized enchondromatosis, type VI. Halal and Azouz (1991) added 3 tentative categories to the 6 in the classification of Spranger et al. (1978). |Pansuriya et al. (2010) suggested a new classification of enchondromatosis (multiple enchondromas). |Roifman and Melamed (2003) described a syndrome of combined immunodeficiency, autoimmunity, and spondylometaphyseal dysplasia in 4 patients, 2 of whom were brother and sister. The parents of the affected sibs were first cousins of Portuguese descent. The 18-year-old sister had repeated infections including pneumonia and multiple upper respiratory infections. At 12 years of age, she developed chronic restrictive lung disease caused by interstitial fibrosis. At the age of 3 years, she had a prolonged episode of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), which responded poorly to prednisone or intravenous immunoglobulin, but resolved after splenectomy. At 3.5 years of age, she was found to have thyroid enlargement and hypothyroidism. Linear growth was observed to be delayed at 4 years of age. Radiologic findings were those of spondylometaphyseal dysplasia. Her younger brother contracted Campylobacter enteritis at 3 months of age and experienced multiple upper respiratory infections. At 3.5 years of age, 3 weeks after experiencing a short upper respiratory infection, he developed ITP and fatal encephalitis. Review of chest x-ray revealed metaphyseal sclerosis of both proximal humeri. The other 2 patients of Roifman and Melamed (2003) had skeletal changes consistent with spondylometaphyseal dysplasia. One, a 5-year-old male, had fulminant hemorrhagic chickenpox at the age of 3 years, which required treatment with acyclovir. He had multiple episodes of upper respiratory infections. At 4 years of age he was found to have ITP. The other patient, a 10-year-old male, had susceptibility to infection from infancy. He was diagnosed with Crohn disease at 5 years of age after a lengthy history of diarrhea. At 8 years of age, he was found to have hypothyroidism. |Roifman and Melamed (2003) compared the findings in their patients with those in patients with Roifman syndrome (300258), Schimke immunoosseous dysplasia (242900), ADA deficiency (102700), and cartilage-hair hypoplasia (250250).|Renella et al. (2006) reported the clinical and radiographic findings in 10 individuals from 6 families with spondyloenchondrodysplasia, one of whom was the female patient previously reported by Roifman and Melamed (2003) as a 'novel' form of skeletal dysplasia with immune deficiency; Renella et al. (2006) stated that her clinical findings and radiographs were compatible with spondyloenchondrodysplasia. Seven individuals had central nervous system manifestations including spasticity, developmental delay, and late-onset cerebral calcifications. Six had clinical manifestations of autoimmunity, and 1 had been diagnosed with immune deficiency. Neurologic and autoimmune manifestations were seen in different combinations within 1 single family. Renella et al. (2006) suggested that spondyloenchondrodysplasia may be a single entity defined by specific radiographic features but with remarkably pleiotropic manifestations that include CNS disease as well as immune dysregulation.|Kulkarni et al. (2007) reported a 5-year-old Indian boy with short stature and a history of recurrent respiratory infections, tuberculosis, and severe varicella infection, in whom radiologic and immunologic evaluation revealed spondylometaphyseal dysplasia, compromised cellular immunity, and evidence of various autoimmune disorders such as systemic lupus erythematosus (see SLE, 152700), juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (604302), and autoimmune thrombocytopenia. The authors noted that the radiologic findings in this case exactly matched those reported by Roifman and Melamed (2003), with splayed, sclerotic irregular long bone metaphyses and platyspondyly.|Renella and Superti-Furga (2007) stated that the history, clinical findings, and radiographic features of the patient described by Kulkarni et al. (2007) were typical of spondyloenchondrodysplasia, and attributed the immune dysregulation with signs of immune deficiency and autoimmunity to the pleiotropism of the disorder.|Navarro et al. (2008) reported 2 unrelated patients, one of whom was born of consanguineous parents, whose manifestations of spondyloenchondrodysplasia included short stature, metaphyseal changes, and platyspondyly; both had intracranial calcifications, although they were discordant for the presence of mental retardation, spasticity, and white matter abnormalities. In addition, 1 patient had features consistent with diagnoses of Sjogren syndrome (270150), polymyositis, hypothyroidism, and severe scleroderma (see 181750), whereas the other had clinical manifestations and an autoantibody profile of SLE, further illustrating the association of SPENCD with immune dysregulation.|Girschick et al. (2015) studied a 9-year-old girl who presented with spasticity, multisystem inflammation, autoimmunity, and immunodeficiency with only minimal metaphyseal changes. The clinical picture was characterized by neurologic impairment due to cerebrovascular disease as well as severe immune dysregulation resulting in autoimmunity and immunodeficiency. In addition to autoimmune hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, polyarthritis, hepatitis, and nephritis, the patient had life-threatening hyperreactivity to viral infections as well as recurrent bacterial infections. In contrast, she exhibited mild signs of skeletal dysplasia, involving only short stature and discrete metaphyseal changes at the wrist. |Bilginer et al. (2016) reported a Turkish sister and brother, aged 16 and 6 years, and an unrelated 16-year-old Turkish girl, with SPENCDI and SLE, and tabulated the features of the 12 reported cases of SPENCDI-associated SLE. All 3 Turkish patients had short stature, arthralgia/arthritis, lupus nephritis, hypocomplementemia, and positive autoantibodies, including antinuclear and anti-dsDNA antibodies. The authors noted that the sibs were homozygous for a previously reported mutation in the ACP5 gene, and that the other family declined genetic testing. Bilginer et al. (2016) stated that early recognition of SPENCDI is imperative and that the condition should be considered in patients with SLE, particularly those who also exhibit short stature and skeletal abnormalities. |Schorr et al. (1976) described enchondromatosis, similar to that of Ollier disease (166000), in association with platyspondyly in 2 sons of first-cousin parents of Iraqi Jewish background. Both boys had short stature and normal intelligence. |Sauvegrain et al. (1980) described 2 patients with enchondromatosis with spinal involvement.|Frydman et al. (1986) studied 4 cases that they stated were similar to those of Schorr et al. (1976) and Sauvegrain et al. (1980). The height of the patients was more than 3 SDs below the mean. Kyphoscoliosis with flat vertebrae and with 'cystic' radiolucencies in the posterior part of the bodies was observed. The metaphyses of long bones showed symmetric radiolucencies that extended into the shafts with sclerotic changes in the diaphyses. The proximal fibula and distal ulna were more severely affected than the corresponding areas of the tibia and radius.|Menger et al. (1989) reported 4 patients, 3 of whom were members of 1 family containing complex consanguinity. They pointed to the 2 cases reported by Gustavson et al. (1978) as 'autosomal recessive spondylometaphyseal dysplasia,' as well as to the case of Chagnon et al. (1985). They documented considerable clinical and radiologic variability. One of the patients in the consanguineous family had normal physical appearance and a height at the 10th centile, yet the x-rays showed marked structural irregularities in the dorsal third of the vertebral bodies. Their unrelated patient was the product of an incestuous (father-daughter) union. |Frydman et al. (1990) reported 6 patients with spondyloenchondrodysplasia, 2 of whom (patients 4 and 5) exhibited progressive spastic quadriplegia. They noted that spastic quadriplegia was also present in the patient of Chagnon et al. (1985) and patient 4 of Menger et al. (1989). In addition, Frydman et al. (1990) suggested that mental retardation, which was found in their patient 5 as well as patient 3 of Sauvegrain et al. (1980) and patient 1 of Menger et al. (1989), might be another variable manifestation of the syndrome. No features of immune dysregulation were reported in the patients of Frydman et al. (1990). |Tuysuz et al. (2004) described 3 Turkish individuals with spondyloenchondrodysplasia, including 2 sibs. One was a 10-year-old boy with short stature, enchondromatous metaphyseal lesions of the long bones, and platyspondyly. His 21-year-old sister had received growth hormone therapy, and she had radiologic findings that were similar but milder than those of her brother. Both sibs had normal intelligence and no calcification of the basal ganglia. The third patient was a 6-year-old boy with short stature, enchondromatous metaphyseal lesions of the long bones, and platyspondyly who also had mental retardation and calcification of the basal ganglia. |Bhargava et al. (2005) reported a mother and son with typical features of spondyloenchondrodysplasia. The father had a normal examination and skeletal survey, and the parents were nonconsanguineous. Bhargava et al. (2005) suggested that autosomal dominant inheritance is possible in this disorder. The radiologic appearance of the spine in the mother changed over time, illustrating the evolving phenotype of the condition: at the age of 42 years, the previously observed lytic enchondromatous lesions of the spine had resolved, leaving mild platyspondyly with endplate scalloping. Bhargava et al. (2005) noted that this resolution of enchondromas as cartilage matures into bone had been reported in other patients as well (Robinson et al., 1991; Uhlmann et al., 1998) and suggested that the disorder might reflect a delay in enchondral bone maturation. |De Bruin et al. (2016) described a Turkish brother and sister, aged 13 and 8 years, who presented for evaluation of severe short stature and were found to be homozygous for a mutation in the ACP5 gene (see MOLECULAR GENETICS). Skeletal survey performed after the molecular diagnosis revealed characteristic findings of spondyloenchondrodysplasia with platyspondyly, widening of the epiphyses of the upper and lower distal extremities, cupping of the ulna, and dense thickening of the radioulnar ligament without Madelung deformity. Brain MRI was normal, and laboratory evaluation showed no evidence of subclinical autoimmune dysfunction.| 
137215::hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC) and lobular breast cancer (LBC) are caused by heterozygous germline mutation in the E-cadherin gene (CDH1; 192090) on chromosome 16q22.|Somatic mutation in the CDH1 gene has also been found in patients with sporadic diffuse gastric cancer and lobular breast cancer.|Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer is an autosomal dominant cancer predisposition syndrome. Heterozygous CDH1 mutation carriers have a 70 to 80% lifetime risk of developing diffuse gastric cancer. In addition to gastric cancer, up to 60% of female mutation carriers develop lobular carcinoma of the breast, and some carriers may develop colorectal cancer. Identification of mutation carriers is important, because the characteristic microscopic foci of signet ring cell adenocarcinoma in HDGC usually involves the submucosa and is often not readily detectable by routine upper endoscopy screening (summary by Fitzgerald et al., 2010). |HDGC is considered to be a distinct disease entity from the more common sporadic occurrence of gastric cancer (613659), which can be associated with environmental factors, such as Helicobacter pylori infection, high-fat diet, or smoking, and is often associated with somatic mutations in disease tissue.|Jones (1964) described 3 multigenerational Maori families from New Zealand segregating early-onset familial gastric cancer. These families were later studied in detail by Guilford et al. (1998). In 1 family, 25 members ranging in age from 14 years upwards had died over 30 years. The majority of cases occurred before age 40 years, which was in marked contrast to the general experience in New Zealand, where about 80% of gastric cancers occur in people older than 60 years. There was no evidence of an increased cancer rate of other organs in this family. Pathology showed histologically poorly differentiated, high-grade, diffuse gastric cancer. |Kakiuchi et al. (1999) studied the clinical features of the probands of 16 Japanese gastric cancer families, which was defined as the existence of 3 or more family members with gastric cancer in at least 2 successive generations. These patients developed cancers more frequently in the cardiac region of the stomach. In addition, the cancers were more often of the undifferentiated type, and were more frequently associated with disseminated peritoneal and liver metastases compared to sporadic cases. |Richards et al. (1999) reported a family from the U.K. in which 6 individuals developed diffuse gastric cancer. In addition to the 6 members with gastric cancer, 1 member of the family developed adenocarcinoma of the rectum at the age of 30 years. Genetic analysis identified a heterozygous mutation in the CDH1 gene (192090.0008). |Huntsman et al. (2001) described genetic screening, surgical management, and pathologic findings in young persons with truncating CDH1 mutations (192090.0012; 192090.0013) in 2 unrelated families with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer reported by Gayther et al. (1998). Total gastrectomy was performed prophylactically in 5 carriers of mutations who were between 22 and 40 years of age. In each case, superficial infiltrates of malignant signet ring cells were identified in surgical samples. |Chun et al. (2001) reported a family with a strong history of HDGC. Five family members, including a sister and brother and 3 first cousins, underwent endoscopic evaluations, which were negative for malignancy, and elected to undergo a prophylactic total gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy. Intramucosal signet ring cell adenocarcinoma was found in various regions of the stomach in all 5 patients, and all 5 demonstrated diminished or absent E-cadherin reactivity in the cancerous mucosa. The age of the 5 patients at the time of surgery varied from 40 to 63 years. |Brooks-Wilson et al. (2004) reported 10 different families with hereditary gastric cancer who had germline mutations in the CDH1 gene. There were multiple cases of breast cancers, including pathologically confirmed lobular breast cancer, in these families. |In a retrospective study of French patients who underwent genetic testing for germline mutations in the CDH1 gene, Benusiglio et al. (2013) found that 18 (11%) of 165 index cases carried pathogenic mutations. Eleven of these patients had a personal or family history that fulfilled diagnostic criteria delineated by Fitzgerald et al. (2010) (see DIAGNOSIS). However, 7 remaining cases did not meet the HDGC criteria: 3 women had sporadic bilateral lobular breast cancer before age 50; 3 came from families with 2 cases of DGC after age 50; and 1 had sporadic diffuse gastric cancer after age 40. Of the 3 woman with LBC before age 50, 2 were only tested for CDH1 after subsequently developing symptomatic DGC and thus meeting the criteria. The remaining woman had CDH1 testing and prophylactic gastrectomy that revealed DGC despite a negative screening endoscopy. These findings suggested that early-onset LBC might be the first manifestation of HDGC, and that a personal or family history of multiple LBCs at a young age, even in the absence of DGC, should prompt cancer geneticists to test for CDH1 germline mutations. |Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer with or without Cleft Palate|Frebourg et al. (2006) reported 2 unrelated families segregating diffuse gastric cancer and cleft palate. Genetic analysis confirmed that affected individuals with gastric cancer with or without cleft palate had heterozygous mutations in the CDH1 gene (192090.0019 and 192090.0020, respectively). In 1 family, 4 mutation carriers had diffuse gastric cancer and cleft lip/palate and 2 mutation carriers had gastric cancer without clefting. In the second family, a man and his 2 daughters had gastric cancer, a daughter with the mutation had cleft lip but no gastric cancer at age 25, and a 16-year-old son with the mutation had congenital aplasia cutis of the scalp and partial acrania (107600) but no known gastric cancer. Both mutations were splicing mutations generating aberrant transcripts with an in-frame deletion, removing the extracellular cadherin repeat domains involved in cell-cell adhesion. Such transcripts might encode mutant proteins with trans-dominant-negative effects. Expression of CDH1 in human embryos during critical stages of lip and palate development suggested that alteration of the E-cadherin pathway may contribute to human clefting. |
601367::common variants in several genes have been associated with increased susceptibility to development of ischemic stroke (see MOLECULAR GENETICS).|A locus for susceptibility to ischemic stroke has been mapped to chromosome 5q12 (STRK1; 606799).|Several conditions in which stroke occurs are inherited in a classic mendelian pattern. As reviewed by Tournier-Lasserve (2002), these monogenic disorders have a low prevalence but a high risk for stroke in mutation carriers. The genes that have been identified include APP (104760), BRI (603904), and CST3 (604312), causing autosomal dominant amyloid angiopathies; NOTCH3 (600276), causing cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL; 125310); and KRIT1 (604214), causing cavernous angioma (116860). |A stroke is an acute neurologic event leading to death of neural tissue of the brain and resulting in loss of motor, sensory and/or cognitive function. It is said to be the third leading cause of death in the United States. Gunel and Lifton (1996) noted that about 20% of strokes are hemorrhagic, resulting in bleeding into the brain. Ischemic strokes, resulting from vascular occlusion, account for the majority of strokes. |Bersano et al. (2008) reviewed genetic polymorphisms that have been implicated in the development of stroke. Candidate genes include those involved in hemostasis (see, e.g., F5; 612309), the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (see, e.g., ACE; 106180), homocysteine (see, e.g., MTHFR; 607093), and lipoprotein metabolism (see, e.g., APOE; 107741). See also hemorrhagic stroke, or intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH; 614519).|
105800::Rupture of an intracranial aneurysm, an outpouching or sac-like widening of a cerebral artery, leads to a subarachnoid hemorrhage, a sudden-onset disease that can lead to severe disability and death. Several risk factors such as smoking, hypertension, and excessive alcohol intake are associated with subarachnoid hemorrhage (summary by Krischek and Inoue, 2006). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Intracranial Berry Aneurysm|Intracranial berry aneurysm-1 (ANIB1) has been mapped to chromosome 7q11.2.|Other mapped loci for intracranial berry aneurysm include ANIB2 (608542) on chromosome 19q13, ANIB3 (609122) on 1p36.13-p34.3, ANIB4 (610213) on 5p15.2-14.3, ANIB5 (300870) on Xp22, ANIB6 (611892) on 9p21, ANIB7 (612161) on 11q24-q25, ANIB8 (612162) on 14q23, ANIB9 (612586) on 2q, ANIB10 (612587) on 8q, and ANIB11 (614252) on 8p22.|Ullrich and Sugar (1960) reported 4 families, in each of which 2 members had cerebral aneurysms. McKusick (1964) observed a 34-year-old man and his 13-year-old daughter, both of whom died of intracranial berry aneurysm. Graf (1966) reported 2 pairs of affected sibs. Beumont (1968) described 3 affected sisters. Thierry et al. (1972) reviewed 10 reports and documented autosomal dominant inheritance. Edelsohn et al. (1972) reported a family with affected father and 3 affected daughters and an affected son. |Brisman and Abbassioun (1971) raised the question of prophylactic investigations in a family with a high frequency of mortality from ruptured aneurysms. Toglia and Samii (1972) suggested that familial aneurysms may have favored locations and that multiple aneurysms may be more often familial than are single aneurysms. They reported 2 families: 2 black sisters and 2 white brothers with intracranial aneurysms. One sister, aged 38, developed 6 intracranial aneurysms, the largest at the left middle cerebral artery. Her sister suffered an aneurysm at the right anterior cerebral artery at age 43. In the second family, a 31-year-old male developed an aneurysm at the bifurcation of the basilar artery. His brother, at age 34, developed an aneurysm at the same site, as well as a smaller one at the left middle cerebral artery. Their father died of a subarachnoid hemorrhage at age 39. Berry aneurysm appears to have a lower frequency in blacks than in whites in the US and elsewhere.|Intracranial aneurysm occurs in some cases of polycystic kidney disease (Jankowicz et al., 1971) and with coarctation of the aorta (120000). |Bromberg et al. (1995) found a higher relative risk for poor outcome in patients with familial subarachnoid hemorrhage from those of sporadic cases. Of their 14 families, 2 were segregating autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (see 173900). The mean age of subarachnoid hemorrhage in familial cases in their series was 44.7 years compared to 53.4 years in sporadic cases. The authors recommended screening individuals at risk for familial intracranial aneurysms with catheter and angiography between the ages of 40 and 60 and with MR angiography between the ages of 20 and 70. |
271980::succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency (SSADHD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ALDH5A1 gene (610045) on chromosome 6p22.|Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency (SSADHD) is a rare autosomal recessive neurologic disorder in which an enzyme defect in the GABA degradation pathway causes a consecutive elevation of gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) and GABA. The clinical features include developmental delay, hypotonia, mental retardation, ataxia, seizures, hyperkinetic behavior, aggression, and sleep disturbances (summary by Reis et al., 2012). |Jakobs et al. (1981) reported a patient with neurologic abnormalities and urinary excretion of gamma-hydroxybutyric acid. |Gibson et al. (1983) demonstrated deficiency of the succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase enzyme in lymphocyte lysates from 2 patients with gamma-hydroxybutyric aciduria. Enzyme activity was 9 to 13% of control values. Gibson et al. (1984) demonstrated levels of SSADH enzyme activity consistent with heterozygosity in both parents of the first reported affected child (Jakobs et al., 1981), who was the offspring of consanguineous Turkish parents. Psychomotor development was mildly retarded but ataxia was severe. He also had marked hypotonia without weakness. Follow-up at age 5 showed no progression or improvement. Increased concentrations of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) were found in the urine and CSF. |Haan et al. (1985) described a 3-year-old boy, born of first-cousin Maltese parents, with SSADH deficiency. Delayed development was the main feature. He did not have ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, or seizures. Roesel et al. (1987) observed this disorder in a brother and sister who also showed increased glycine excretion. |Gibson et al. (1997) described differing clinical presentation of SSADH deficiency in an adolescent brother and sister from Lifu Island, New Caledonia. The 2 affected sibs were from a sibship of 7 whose parents were first cousins. The 15-year-old male had global psychomotor and intellectual retardation, functioning at the developmental level of 4 years. His sight was said to be poor, and growth was subnormal. Genitalia were underdeveloped and there were no secondary sexual characteristics. The younger female sib was more severely affected. As in the case of her brother, her eyesight was thought to be poor. At age 11, she developed tonic/clonic seizures, which were only partially controlled by valproic acid. Treatment with vigabatrin aggravated the convulsive disorder.|Gibson et al. (1997) reported 23 new patients with SSADH deficiency. The most frequent clinical features included developmental delay of motor, mental, and language skills, hypotonia, seizures, hyporeflexia, ataxia, behavioral problems, and EEG abnormalities. Less common features included abnormal eye movements and psychosis in older patients. Approximately 30% of patients had normal early development and there was wide variability in the severity of mental retardation. |Chambliss et al. (1998) stated that SSADH deficiency had been identified in approximately 150 patients. Affected individuals accumulate large quantities of 2 neuroactive compounds in physiologic fluids: GABA and 4-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB). |Gibson et al. (1998) provided a review of succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency and contrasted the clinical and biochemical findings in patients with neuropharmacologic data on 4-hydroxybutyric acid accumulation in animals and humans. |Pearl et al. (2003) stated that SSADH deficiency had been diagnosed in approximately 350 patients. They reported 11 additional patients and reviewed the clinical features of 51 previously reported patients. Age at diagnosis ranged from 1 to 21 years. The main clinical features included mild to moderate mental retardation, disproportionate language dysfunction, hypotonia, hyporeflexia, autistic behaviors, seizures, and hallucinations. Brain MRI of 5 patients showed symmetric increased T2 signal in the globus pallidus. Pearl et al. (2003) noted that GHB has neuroactive properties and has been used to manage cataplexy and alcohol- and opiate-withdrawal syndromes. |Blasi et al. (2006) reported a female infant with SSADH deficiency confirmed by genetic analysis (see 610045.0006). She presented at age 9 months with psychomotor delay, strabismus, and generalized hypotonia. Biochemical studies showed severely decreased SSADH enzyme activity. |Leuzzi et al. (2007) reported 2 Italian sibs with SSADH deficiency who developed paroxysmal exercise-induced dystonia at age 16 and 12 years, respectively. Their prior phenotypes were classic for SSADH deficiency. Treatment with vigabatrin improved the paroxysmal dystonia in both patients and also improved gait clumsiness and seizures in 1 patient. |O'Rourke et al. (2010) reported a 9-month-old boy with mild global delay who presented with 'yes-yes' head bobbing. Brain imaging showed abnormal signal hyperintensities in the globus pallidus and white matter on T2-weighted MRI, and brain magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) showed high lactate, consistent with SSADH deficiency. The authors suggested that increased gamma-hydroxybutyrate may affect diencephalic extrapyramidal pathways, resulting in abnormal movement. |
222900::congenital sucrose-isomaltase malabsorption is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the SI gene (609845), which encodes sucrose-isomaltase, on chromosome 3q26.|A deficiency of sucrase-isomaltase, an integral protein of the small intestine brush-border membrane responsible for catalyzing the hydrolysis of dietary sucrose and some of the products of starch digestion, results in osmotic diarrhea when the disaccharide is ingested, because absorption cannot occur until after hydrolysis produces the component monosaccharides. Hauri et al. (1985) identified sucrase-isomaltase immunologically in biopsy specimens from a child with congenital deficiency of the enzyme. Since the size of the protein was consistent with incomplete glycosylation and the protein could not be identified in the brush-border membrane by immune electron microscopy, the authors suggested that the deficiency was the consequence of a defect in intracellular transport. Lloyd and Olsen (1987) demonstrated a severe defect in intracellular processing of the enzyme. |Newton et al. (1996) reported 4 infants with congenital sucrase-isomaltase deficiency. While the onset of symptoms ranged from 2 to 16 weeks, delayed diagnosis led to severe malnutrition in these infants. The authors commented that the population prevalence may be more common than presently recognized. This entity deserves consideration in the differential diagnosis for infants with persistent, watery diarrhea upon ingesting formula that contains glucose polymer. |A symptomatic form of SI deficiency in adults and late in onset was described by Jansen et al. (1965). By studies at the subcellular and protein level with monoclonal antibodies against sucrase-isomaltase, Naim et al. (1988) identified at least 3 phenotypes among 8 cases: 1 in which sucrase-isomaltase accumulated intracellularly, probably in the endoplasmic reticulum, as a membrane-associated high-mannose precursor; 1 in which the intracellular transport of the enzyme was apparently blocked in the Golgi apparatus; and 1 in which catalytically altered enzyme was transported to the cell surface. In all patients, electrophoretically normal or near-normal high-mannose sucrase-isomaltase was demonstrated. Apparently, different mutations in the sucrase-isomaltase gene lead to the synthesis of transport-incompetent or functionally altered enzyme. |Starnes and Welsh (1970) noted association of intestinal sucrase deficiency with renal calculi. The stones were predominantly calcium oxalate in 1 case. Reports of multiple affected sibs (e.g., Kerry and Townley, 1965) and consanguineous parents (e.g., Jansen et al., 1965) support recessive inheritance. Homozygotes have severe enzyme deficiency with clinical symptoms throughout life. Heterozygotes have intermediate enzyme values and no symptoms in adulthood, but may have mild symptoms in infancy. |Gray et al. (1976) found complete absence of sucrase-isomaltase by both enzymatic and antigenic measures. |Treem (1995) provided a review. |Treem (1996) discussed phenotypic heterogeneity in patients, noting that presentation in patients with CSID can include severe diarrhea and failure to thrive in infancy, 'chronic nonspecific diarrhea' without growth failure in toddlers, and 'irritable bowel syndrome' in adolescents and adults. Studies of the sucrase-isomaltase enzyme in patients with CSID (e.g., Fransen et al., 1991) indicated abnormalities of intracellular processing (glycosylation and folding), intracellular transport, and homing and insertion of the enzyme into the brush-border membrane. In most patients, both sucrase and isomaltase activities are completely absent; however, in some the mature enzyme is found inserted into the brush-border membrane and the mutation affects only the catalytic site of sucrase, leaving sucrase activity absent and isomaltase activity reduced by 50 to 90%. |Five different phenotypes of sucrase-isomaltase deficiency have been identified (Hauri et al., 1985; Fransen et al., 1991). Ouwendijk et al. (1996) described phenotypes I and II as exhibiting intracellular accumulation of mannose-rich SI in the ER and the Golgi, respectively. In phenotype III, an enzymatically inactive, but transport-competent, SI is expressed. Phenotype IV expresses a partially folded, mannose-rich SI molecule that is missorted to the basal lateral membrane. Phenotype V shows an SI species that undergoes intracellular degradation leaving behind the isomaltase subunit that is correctly targeted to the brush border membrane. |
272300::isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency (ISOD) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the sulfite oxidase gene (SUOX; 606887) on chromosome 12q13.|In an infant with fatal neurologic disease and ectopia lentis, Mudd et al. (1967) found increased sulfite in the urine with markedly decreased inorganic sulfate excretion. A deficiency in the activity of sulfite oxidase, an enzyme that normally catalyzes conversion of sulfite to sulfate, was postulated. Sibs of the infant had died, probably of the same disorder. |Van der Klei-van Moorsel et al. (1991) described a case of sulfite oxidase deficiency in which onset of symptoms occurred at 11 months of age. No ocular abnormalities were found. |A milder form of sulfite oxidase deficiency with a late onset was reported by Barbot et al. (1995) in a 7-year-old mentally retarded Portuguese girl whose parents were first cousins. The patient had an ataxic gait, generalized dystonia and choreoathetosis, and minimal development of language. This mild form cannot be distinguished from combined molybdenum cofactor deficiency on clinical grounds. The sulfite test may appear negative and sulfate excretion may be in the normal range (van der Klei-van Moorsel et al., 1991). |Garrett et al. (1998) described a 5-year-old girl born of first-cousin parents of Dutch descent. She exhibited developmental delay and hypotonia during the first 2 years of life with regression beginning at approximately 21 months of age. She had 2 healthy sibs. She had 2 seizures at approximately 5 months of age but none thereafter. At age 2 years, bilateral dislocation of the lenses was detected, and calcification of the basal ganglia and hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis were documented on computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging scans. Ataxia, dystonia, and choreoathetotic movements became progressively worse. She had mild eczema, fine hair, and delayed teething, but normal nails and joints. She had significant irritability and spasms needing sedation at night. At age 5 years, she had significant failure to thrive with feeding problems, aspiration, and generalized hypertonia. She was found to have a mutation resulting in an arg-to-gln substitution at amino acid 160 (606887.0001) of liver sulfite oxidase. |Touati et al. (2000) reported 2 unrelated patients with isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency, with a mild clinical course and late onset of symptoms. In 1 patient, the disease started at 15 months with an acute crisis of agitation, unexplained crying, and restlessness following otitis. In the other patient, the diagnosis was made at 10 months when the patient presented with slight motor delay and dislocation of lenses. In both patients, sulfite oxidase activity in fibroblasts was undetectable. |
603041::mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome-1 (MTDPS1), which manifests as a neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy (MNGIE), is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the nuclear-encoded thymidine phosphorylase gene (TYMP; 131222) on chromosome 22q13.See also MTDPS4B (613662) for a less common form of MNGIE caused by recessive mutation in the DNA polymerase gamma gene (POLG; 174763).|Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndrome-1 (MTDPS1) is an autosomal recessive progressive multisystem disorder clinically characterized by onset between the second and fifth decades of life of ptosis, progressive external ophthalmoplegia (PEO), gastrointestinal dysmotility (often pseudoobstruction), cachexia, diffuse leukoencephalopathy, peripheral neuropathy, and mitochondrial dysfunction. Mitochondrial DNA abnormalities can include depletion, deletion, and point mutations (Taanman et al., 2009). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Mitochondrial DNA Depletion Syndromes|Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndromes are clinically and genetically heterogeneous, and most are autosomal recessive disorders. See also MTDPS2 (609560), caused by mutation in the TK2 gene (188250); MTDPS3 (251880), caused by mutation in the DGUOK gene (601465); MTDPS4A (203700) and MTDPS4B (613662), both caused by mutation in the POLG gene (174763); MTDPS5 (612073), caused by mutation in the SUCLA2 gene (603921); MTDPS6 (256810), caused by mutation in the MPV17 gene (137960); MTDPS7 (271245), caused by mutation in the C10ORF2 gene (606075); MTDPS8A (612075) and MTDPS8B (see 612075), both caused by mutation in the RRM2B gene (604712); MTDPS9 (245400), caused by mutation in the SUCLG1 gene (611224); MTDPS10 (212350), caused by mutation in the AGK gene (610345); MTDPS11 (615084), caused by mutation in the MGME1 gene (615076); MTDPS12A (617184) and MTDPS12B (615418), both caused by mutation in the SLC25A4 gene (103220); MTDPS13 (615471), caused by mutation in the FBXL4 gene (605654); MTDPS14 (616896), caused by mutation in the OPA1 gene (605290); and MTDPS15 (617156), caused by mutation in the TFAM gene (600438).|Bardosi et al. (1987) reported a 42-year-old woman with a 10-year history of external ophthalmoplegia, malabsorption resulting in chronic malnutrition, muscle atrophy, and polyneuropathy. Computerized tomography showed hypodensity of her cerebral white matter. A metabolic disturbance consisted of lactic acidosis after moderate glucose loads with increased excretion of hydroxybutyric and fumaric acids. Postmortem studies demonstrated gastrointestinal scleroderma as the morphologic manifestation of her malabsorption syndrome, ocular and skeletal myopathy with ragged-red fibers, peripheral neuropathy, and vascular abnormalities of meningeal and peripheral nerve vessels. Liver and muscle tissues showed a partial defect of cytochrome c oxidase. |Blake et al. (1990) described 2 patients of German extraction: a 41-year-old man and his 35-year-old sister. Since childhood, both had had intermittent diarrhea and both developed bilateral ptosis and ophthalmoplegia in their twenties and progressive neurosensory hearing loss in their thirties. Both were short, thin, and cachectic. There was mild proximal limb weakness. MRI in the man showed diffusely decreased signal in the white matter of the brain. Muscle biopsies showed ragged-red fibers, scattered fibers devoid of cytochrome c oxidase activity, and features of denervation. Biochemically, an isolated muscle mitochondria showed a partial defect of cytochrome c oxidase in both patients.|Simon et al. (1990) described 5 persons in 3 separate families with a progressive neurologic disorder characterized by sensorimotor peripheral polyneuropathy, cranial neuropathies (external ophthalmoplegia and deafness), and chronic intestinal pseudoobstruction. In 2 of the patients so studied, magnetic resonance imaging showed widespread abnormality of the cerebral and cerebellar white matter. Autopsy in 3 of them showed widespread endoneural fibrosis and demyelination in the peripheral nervous system, possibly secondary to axonal atrophy, and poorly defined leukoencephalopathy. The cranial nerves and spinal roots were less severely involved; the neurons in the brainstem and spinal cord were intact. The fatal gastrointestinal dysmotility was due to severe visceral neuropathy. In 2 families, 2 brothers were affected; in the third family, a brother and sister. There was no recognized parental consanguinity. Simon et al. (1990) suggested the acronym POLIP, summarizing the cardinal features. |Threlkeld et al. (1992) described a 26-year-old woman with a history of polycystic ovaries who had acute onset of nausea, vomiting, and lower abdominal pain 3 years previously. She was found to have numerous diverticula in the small intestine and a ruptured jejunal diverticulum. Histopathologic examination of the surgically removed jejunal specimen and appendix showed incomplete longitudinal muscle with ganglion cells located just below the serosa. Myoelectric studies disclosed no propagation of migratory motor complexes. Gastrostomy tube feedings failed because of dysmotility as did also a jejunostomy. Parenteral alimentation was necessary. Prokinetic agents, including erythromycin and cisapride, were unsuccessful in improving intestinal motility. Although the patient had no ocular complaints, she demonstrated blepharoptosis and ophthalmoparesis. She had proximal muscle weakness and mild ataxia. Magnetic resonance imaging of the head showed diffuse white matter disease, notably in the periventricular and subcortical areas as well as in the pons. Electrocardiography showed no conduction defects. Biopsy of the sural nerve confirmed a demyelinating neuropathy with a mild degree of axonal degeneration, which had been suspected from the findings of neuroelectric studies. Muscle biopsy revealed variation in myofiber size, with numerous scattered atrophic fibers and a few degenerating fibers, but no ragged-red fibers. |Hirano et al. (1994) suggested that the acronym MNGIE be preserved but that the disorder be called mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalomyopathy to emphasize that this is a mitochondrial disorder. They found 21 reported patients who met their criteria for this diagnosis. In 16 of 22 patients, symptoms began before age 20. In 20 of 24 patients, the initial symptoms were gastrointestinal, ocular, or both. The neurologic manifestations were predominantly outside the central nervous system, although many patients showed signs of leukoencephalopathy on brain MRI scans. |As reviewed by Hirano et al. (1998), laboratory studies of MNGIE patients demonstrated defects in oxidative phosphorylation, including lactic acidosis, ragged-red fibers in skeletal muscle biopsies, ultrastructurally abnormal mitochondria, and decreased activities of the mitochondrial electron-transport enzymes. Hirano et al. (1998) studied 4 ethnically distinct MNGIE families. Probands from each family were shown by Southern blot analysis to have multiple mtDNA deletions in skeletal muscle. |Nishino et al. (2000) identified 35 MNGIE patients and reviewed the clinical findings. MNGIE has clinically homogeneous features but varies in age at onset and rate of progression. Gastrointestinal dysmotility is the most prominent manifestation, with recurrent diarrhea, borborygmi, and intestinal pseudoobstruction. Patients usually die in early adulthood (mean, 37.6 years; range, 26 to 58 years). Cerebral leukodystrophy is characteristic. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has depletion, multiple deletions, or both. Leukocyte TP activity was reduced drastically in 16 patients tested (0.009 +/- 0.021 micromol/hr/mg) compared with 19 control individuals (0.67 +/- 0.21 micromol/hr/mg). |Gamez et al. (2002) reported 2 Spanish sisters who were shown to have homozygous mutations in the TYMP gene (131222.0009), thus confirming a diagnosis of MNGIE. The proband presented with severe gastrointestinal dysmotility, mild eye movement abnormalities, muscle weakness, and a sensorimotor polyneuropathy. Her sister presented with marked ophthalmoparesis and ptosis and asymptomatic gastroparesis. MRI of both patients showed diffuse leukoencephalopathy. Thymidine phosphorylase activity was undetectable in both patients and plasma thymidine levels were high. Gamez et al. (2002) commented on the clinical variability present in members of the same family with the same mutation. |Fried et al. (1975) described 2 sisters, born of consanguineous unaffected Ashkenazi Jewish parents of Hungarian origin, who had onset at ages 34 and 35 years, respectively, of bilateral ptosis. Both patients showed decreased gag reflex, but only 1 complained of dysphagia for liquids and dysarthria. Both patients had limited eye movements, particularly in the upwards direction. One patient had foot drop and the other had difficulty climbing stairs and standing up from a recumbent position. Both had absent ankle reflexes. A distant cousin, the product of a first-cousin marriage, was said to have been identically affected. Fried et al. (1975) suggested that these patients had an autosomal recessive inheritance form of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (see 164300). However, Sadeh (2008) reported that he had studied the 2 sisters and found that they had typical MNGIE with mitochondrial DNA deletions. Both sisters died from malnutrition associated with MNGIE. |Giordano et al. (2008) reported 5 unrelated patients with TYMP-related MNGIE. Age and symptoms at onset were variable, ranging from childhood appearance of ptosis and/or gastrointestinal symptoms to PEO at age 26. One patient developed foot numbness at age 18. All developed variable features of MNGIE, such as borborygmi, diarrhea, abdominal pain and cramps, and pseudoobstruction, leading to severe weight loss and cachexia. Other features included PEO, demyelinating sensorimotor polyneuropathy, and white matter hyperintensities on brain MRI. Two had sensorineural deafness. Death occurred between ages 28 and 39 years, suggesting that decreased life span is associated with this disorder. |Taanman et al. (2009) reported a 22-year-old English woman with genetically confirmed MNGIE. She had postprandial vomiting since infancy, sensorineural hearing loss since age 13 years, a 12-month history of weight loss, and 6 weeks of progressive pain, numbness, and weakness in the limbs. Laboratory studies showed a demyelinating neuropathy, asymptomatic diffuse white matter lesions on MRI, sparse ragged-red fibers on skeletal muscle biopsy, and increased plasma thymidine and deoxyuridine. There were low levels of deleted mtDNA, with normal mtDNA content, and cultured patient fibroblasts showed a progressive loss of MTCO1 expression (516030) during serial passage, which was not found in controls. Immunochemical studies showed lack of the TYMP protein in patient fibroblasts. |
188550::susceptibility to nonmedullary thyroid cancer-1 (NMTC1) is conferred by heterozygous mutation in the thyroid transcription factor-1 gene (TITF1), also known as NK2 homeobox-1 (NKX2-1; 600635), on chromosome 14q13.|Nonmedullary thyroid cancer (NMTC) comprises thyroid cancers of follicular cell origin and accounts for more than 95% of all thyroid cancer cases. The remaining cancers originate from parafollicular cells (medullary thyroid cancer, MTC; 155240). NMTC is classified into 4 groups: papillary, follicular (188470), Hurthle cell (607464), and anaplastic. Approximately 5% of NMTC is hereditary, occurring as a component of a familial cancer syndrome (e.g., familial adenomatous polyposis, 175100; Carney complex, 160980) or as a primary feature (familial NMTC or FNMTC). Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is the most common histologic subtype of FNMTC, accounting for approximately 85% of cases (summary by Vriens et al., 2009). |PTC is characterized by distinctive nuclear alterations including pseudoinclusions, grooves, and chromatin clearing. PTCs smaller than 1 cm are referred to as papillary microcarcinomas. These tumors have been identified in up to 35% of individuals at autopsy, suggesting that they may be extremely common although rarely clinically relevant. PTC can also be multifocal but is typically slow-growing with a tendency to spread to lymph nodes and usually has an excellent prognosis (summary by Bonora et al., 2010). |Genetic Heterogeneity of Susceptibility to Nonmedullary Thyroid Cancer|Other susceptibilities to nonmedullary thyroid cancer include NMTC2 (188470), caused by mutation in the SRGAP1 gene (606523); NMTC3 (606240), mapped to chromosome 2q21; NMTC4 (616534), caused by mutation in the FOXE1 gene (602617); and NMTC5 (616535), caused by mutation in the HABP2 gene (603924).|A susceptibility locus for familial nonmedullary thyroid carcinoma with or without cell oxyphilia (TCO; 603386) has been mapped to chromosome 19p.|Ngan et al. (2009) identified 4 of 20 unrelated patients with multinodular goiter (MNG)/papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC) who had an ala339-to-val (A339V) mutation in the TITF1 gene (600635.0012). Among the 4 patients with the A339V mutation, 2 women had first-degree relatives who also carried the mutation; all those relatives had had a history of MNG before diagnosis of PTC. One of the family members carrying this mutation developed metastatic colon cancer. One patient developed MNG at age 26 years; at age 37, she noticed a gradual increase in size of the goiter, and was found to have stage II disease. A second patient with this mutation was diagnosed at age 21 years with benign MNG and underwent right hemithyroidectomy. At the age of 48, she developed a left-sided thyroid swelling, which showed a follicular lesion necessitating total thyroidectomy. A 1.2-cm PTC was identified. The index case of family 2 developed benign MNG at age 34 years and PTC at age 46. The tumor contained a BRAF V600E mutation (164757.0001). The patient's mother was diagnosed with MNG in her twenties and PTC in her thirties; at age 71, she was diagnosed with colorectal carcinoma. |Familial Nonmedullary Thyroid Cancer|Lote et al. (1980) identified 2 kindreds with 7 and 4 cases of papillary carcinoma in otherwise healthy, nonirradiated subjects. All grew up in 1 of 2 small fishing villages in northern Norway. The familial cases showed an earlier mean age at diagnosis (37.6 years) than did sporadic cases from the same region (52.8 years). Multiple endocrine adenomatosis, Gardner syndrome (175100), and arrhenoblastoma (see 138800) were excluded. |Phade et al. (1981) described 3 affected sibs, of normal parents, with discovery of cancer at ages 12, 7, and 20 years. The authors found one other report of familial papillary carcinoma without polyposis coli, in a father and daughter, aged 40 and 12, respectively, at discovery (Lacour et al., 1973). The young age at occurrence and frequent bilateral involvement are characteristic of hereditary cancers.|Stoffer et al. (1985, 1986) presented evidence for the existence of a familial form of papillary carcinoma of the thyroid, possibly inherited as an autosomal dominant. Four parents of patients with familial PACT had colon cancer and 5 other family members died of intraabdominal malignancy that was not further defined. Perkel et al. (1988) presented evidence suggesting a familial susceptibility factor in radiation-induced thyroid neoplasms. |Grossman et al. (1995) identified 13 families with 30 individuals affected by familial nonmedullary thyroid cancer, which they abbreviated FNMTC. In 14 of these affected individuals whom they personally treated, 13 had multifocal tumors, and 6 of these were bilateral. The incidence of lymph node metastasis was 57%, as was the incidence of local invasion. Recurrences occurred in 7 patients during follow-up. The histologic diagnosis was papillary thyroid carcinoma in 13 of the 14 patients; in 1 patient it was Hurthle cell carcinoma. |Takami et al. (1996) identified 34 families in Japan with 72 individuals affected by nonmedullary thyroid cancer: 17 men and 55 women. Pathologic diagnosis was papillary carcinoma in 64 patients, follicular carcinoma in 6, and anaplastic carcinoma in 2. From the findings in their study they concluded that familial nonmedullary thyroid cancer behaves more aggressively than sporadic nonmedullary thyroid cancer. |Canzian et al. (1998) noted that families with multiple cases of nonmedullary thyroid cancer had been reported by Lote et al. (1980) and Burgess et al. (1997). FNMTC may represent 3 to 7% of all thyroid tumors. The tumors are usually multifocal, recur more frequently, and show an earlier age at onset than in sporadic cases. These characteristics are well exemplified by familial adenomatous polyposis-associated thyroid carcinoma, which, in addition, has been found to be a distinct morphologic entity, rather than the papillary carcinoma that it had previously been believed to be (Harach et al., 1994). |
606003::transaldolase deficiency is caused by homozygous mutation in the TALDO1 gene (602063) on chromosome 11p15.|Verhoeven et al. (2001) described deficiency of transaldolase in the first child of healthy, consanguineous Turkish parents. Soon after birth, the patient had undergone surgical correction of aortic coarctation. Within several months, she developed hepatosplenomegaly. Elevated concentrations of ribitol, D-arabitol, and erythritol were found in urine and plasma. At the age of 10 years, the patient showed many telangiectases of the skin, hepatosplenomegaly, and enlarged clitoris. She had persistent thrombocytopenia which was thought to be caused by splenic pooling due to the hepatosplenomegaly. A deficiency of transaldolase was discovered by incubating the patient's lymphoblasts and erythrocytes with ribose-5-phosphate and subsequently analyzing phosphate sugar metabolites. |Eyaid et al. (2013) reported 12 cases of transaldolase deficiency from 6 families who were followed for 8 years. All 12 patients had cardiac defects, wrinkly skin, and dysmorphic facial features characterized by triangular face, low-set ears, prominent philtrum, infraorbital creases, wide mouth, and thin lips. All had hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Seven of 12 had liver dysfunction. Poor growth was quite common. Cardiac defects included patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and persistent foramen ovale (PFO). One patient (patient 2, family 3) had dextrocardia with moderate PDA; he also had situs inversus totalis and mild right hydronephrosis. Urine samples from 8 patients were analyzed for polyols, heptuloses, and sedoheptulose-7P. In all urine samples, elevated excretion of erythritol, ribitol, arabitol, sedoheptitol, perseitol, sedoheptulose, mannoheptulose, and sedoheptulose-7P were detected, consistent with transaldolase deficiency. The sugar phosphates ribose-5-P and xylulose (+ribulose)-5P were also highly elevated in urine. Plasma samples received from 9 patients showed elevated concentrations of the polyols erythritol, arabitol, and ribitol. Eyaid et al. (2013) remarked that cutis laxa and dysmorphism were most notable in the neonatal period but appeared to be less recognizable after infancy, whereas the bleeding tendency and liver involvement followed a more irregular course that waxed and waned but was very severe in some. |
275350::transcobalamin II deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding transcobalamin II (TCN2; 613441) on chromosome 22q12.|Transcobalamin II deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder with onset in early infancy characterized by failure to thrive, megaloblastic anemia, and pancytopenia. Other features include methylmalonic aciduria, recurrent infections, and vomiting and diarrhea. Treatment with cobalamin results in clinical improvement, but the untreated disorder may result in mental retardation and neurologic abnormalities (summary by Haberle et al., 2009). |Hall (1981) gave a clinically oriented review of congenital defects of vitamin B12 transport, and Frater-Schroder (1983) gave a genetically oriented review. |Hakami et al. (1971) described megaloblastic anemia and other manifestations of vitamin B12 deficiency in 2 infant sibs who had normal levels of serum B12. Deficiency of transcobalamin II was demonstrated. A partial deficiency in both parents and other hematologically normal relatives indicated autosomal recessive inheritance. Decreased intestinal absorption of B12, uncorrected by intrinsic factor (609342), suggested that transcobalamin II is involved in B12 absorption. Other B12-responsive megaloblastic anemias of the pediatric age group include a form due to lack of intrinsic factor (261000) and a form due to a defect in intestinal absorption with associated proteinuria (261100). |Scott et al. (1972) concluded that no defect in homocysteine methyltransferase or methylmalonyl CoA mutase occurs in patients with TC II deficiency, and that TC II is normally necessary mainly for delivery of the cobalamin molecule to the hematopoietic system. Immunodeficiency can occur in some families with deficiency of TC II. |The patient with TC deficiency reported by Hitzig et al. (1974) came from a Moroccan family in which 2 sons had died of severe infections in early infancy. The diagnosis of severe congenital neutropenia (Kostmann infantile genetic agranulocytosis; 610738) was initially made. The proband was delivered by cesarean section and maintained in a sterile unit for 115 days, in anticipation of bone marrow transplantation at a later stage. Agammaglobulinemia and lack of antibody response to strong antigenic stimuli were found. Cellular immune reactions were normal. After removal from isolation, he developed severe diarrhea and an upper respiratory infection. Severe atrophy of the intestinal mucosa and deficiency of disaccharidases were found. At 7 months of age he developed macromegaloblastic anemia with low reticulocyte counts, leukopenia with granulocytopenia, and thrombocytopenia with severe hemorrhagic diathesis. While in the sterile environment he had received vitamin B12 and folic acid; vitamin B12 quickly restored him to normal health. The blood, the intestine and the immune system returned to normal. With B12 therapy, an anomalous B12-binding protein, possibly 'transcobalamin III,' or fetal vitamin B12-binding globulin, appeared in the patient's serum. |Seligman et al. (1980) described a patient with megaloblastic anemia who represented a compound heterozygote for absent TC II and defective TC II that failed to bind cobalamin. The father was heterozygous for the absence of TC II and the mother was heterozygous for the defective form. The proband had 2 children: a heterozygote for absence of TC II and a heterozygote for abnormal TC II. The abnormality would not have been recognized if tested only for immunoreactive TC II. Continued treatment with only folate, to which the anemia responded, would have led to serious neurologic abnormality. |Thomas et al. (1982) described a child of Maltese ancestry who presented in early infancy with megaloblastic anemia and was treated with folinic acid from 6 weeks of age when the diagnosis of dihydrofolate reductase deficiency (see 126060) was made (Case 2, Tauro et al., 1976). TC II deficiency was not recognized until age 2 years by which time he had severe mental retardation, ataxia, and a pyramidal deficit in the limbs. Following treatment with intramuscular hydroxycobalamin, his condition slowly improved, but at age 7 years he was left with severe neurologic deficit. Hoffbrand et al. (1984) reported that this patient had no serum transcobalamin II binding capacity, whereas his parents and sisters had values about 50% of normal. Immunoreactive TC II was present in the patient's serum but at about 39% of normal. |Sacher et al. (1983) described a boy, born healthy, who developed diarrhea, vomiting, and ulcerative stomatitis together with megaloblastic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia at the age of 5 weeks. Serum apo-TC2 was not detectable. Cultured skin fibroblasts failed to secrete functioning TC II. Both parents and the maternal grandfather, who were asymptomatic, were shown to be heterozygous for a silent TCN2 allele. The authors noted that the level of serum cobalamin is usually normal in cases of TC II deficiency because the bulk of serum cobalamin normally circulates attached to R binder protein rather than to TC II. However, Meyers and Carmel (1984) observed a case of TC II deficiency with subnormal serum cobalamin. |Barshop et al. (1990) reported the case of a black infant with severe TC II deficiency. The infant had not only megaloblastic anemia but also thrombocytopenia and neutropenia, i.e., pancytopenia. Methylmalonic acid and homocystine were found in the urine. |The patient reported by Kaikov et al. (1991) presented at 6 weeks of age with failure to thrive, diarrhea, macrocytic anemia, and decreased IgG. Both parents had intermediate levels of transcobalamin II consistent with the heterozygous state. |Vance et al. (1993) reported the cytogenetic findings of bone marrow aspirates and identified fragile site expression in the hematopoietic cells of a patient with TC II deficiency. |Haberle et al. (2009) reported 3 patients with TC II deficiency. The first was a Lebanese girl, born of consanguineous parents, who had diarrhea, vomiting, hypotonia, and failure to thrive at age 3 weeks. Laboratory studies showed pancytopenia, methylmalonic aciduria, and megaloblastic anemia. Cobalamin supplementation resulted in clinical improvement. The other 2 patients were sibs, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, who both showed onset in the first weeks of life of failure to thrive, pancytopenia, and methylmalonic aciduria, and both responded to hydroxycobalamin treatment. Both had normal psychomotor development at ages 9 and 11 years, respectively. |
602079::trimethylaminuria, sometimes referred to as fish-odor syndrome, is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding flavin-containing monooxygenase-3 (FMO3; 136132) on chromosome 1q24.|Another inborn error of metabolism accompanied by fish-like body odor results from deficiency of dimethylglycine dehydrogenase (see 605850).|Trimethylaminuria results from the abnormal presence of large amounts of volatile and malodorous trimethylamine within the body. This chemical, a tertiary aliphatic amine, is excreted in the urine, sweat (ichthyohidrosis), and breath, which take on the offensive odor of decaying fish (Mitchell, 1996). |Individuals with trimethylaminuria excrete relatively large amounts of amino-trimethylamine (TMA) in their urine, sweat, and breath, and exhibit a fishy body odor characteristic of the malodorous free amine, leading to the designation fish-odor syndrome. TMA is a product of intestinal bacterial action. The substrates from which it is derived are choline, which, bound to lecithin, is present most abundantly in egg yolk, liver, kidney, legumes, soy beans, and peas, as well as from trimethylamine-N-oxide, a normal constituent of saltwater fishes. Normally, TMA produced in the gut is absorbed and oxidized in the liver by FMO, a microsomal mixed-function oxidase (Higgins et al., 1972). |Humbert et al. (1970) first used the terms trimethylaminuria and fish-odor syndrome to describe a 6-year-old girl who intermittently had a fishy odor. She also had multiple pulmonary infections beginning in the neonatal period, the clinical stigmata of Turner syndrome but normal karyotype, splenomegaly, anemia, and neutropenia. Her urine contained increased amounts of TMA. In the same patient, Humbert et al. (1971) found defective membrane function in platelets, neutrophils, and red cells, and Higgins et al. (1972) found deficiency of trimethylamine oxidase by liver biopsy. Calvert (1973) noted that the features in the patient of Humbert et al. (1970) were those of Noonan syndrome (163950). He studied a clinically identical patient but found no trimethylaminuria with or without loading with trimethylamine. Witt et al. (1988) included the patient of Humbert et al. (1970) in their series of cases of Noonan syndrome with bleeding diathesis. |Lee et al. (1976) observed a brother and sister with trimethylaminuria; in both, an offensive fishy odor occurred when the mother was breast feeding them and had eaten eggs or fish. Danks et al. (1976) referred to 4 affected individuals in their personal experience. |Mayatepek and Kohlmuller (1998) described 2 unrelated children with transient trimethylaminuria. One was a 2-month-old female infant referred because of an offensive odor on her skin and from her urine which was noticed by the parents. When the child was 6 months old, the fishy odor completely disappeared. The second patient was a 4-year-old boy who was referred because of smelly urine and skin which had been noticed by his mother from about the age of 18 months. In these children, transient trimethylaminuria occurred without N-oxidation deficiency. |Zschocke et al. (1999) studied patients with mild trimethylaminuria and concluded that FMO3 deficiency is a spectrum of phenotypes that can include transient or mild malodor depending on environmental exposures. Mild FMO3 deficiency may have clinical relevance beyond intermittent body odor leading to an abnormal metabolism of drugs, hypertension, or increased cardiovascular disease risk. |Todd (1979) noted that patients with TMA may be deeply disturbed, depressed, and even suicidal, with psychosocial problems in school. Rehman (1999) also reported that patients with TMA often have psychosocial problems, including strong feelings of shame, embarrassment, low self-esteem, social isolation, anxiety, and depression. |
276100::Tada et al. (1963) described a 9-year-old girl with dwarfism, mental defect, cutaneous photosensitivity, and gait disturbance resembling cerebellar ataxia. The clinical features resembled Hartnup disease (234500) but the chemical findings were different. Tryptophane was excreted in the urine in excess without increase in indican or indole acetic acid excretion. With tryptophane loading, the plasma level of tryptophane increased markedly and remained higher longer than in normals and tryptophanuria was increased with relatively little increase in kynurenine excretion. The defect was thought to concern the conversion of tryptophane to kynurenine. The disorder was thought to have occurred in 3 children (2 males and the female proband) in 3 sibships. All 6 parents were traced to a common ancestral couple. The proband showed conjunctival telangiectasia which together with ataxia creates similarities to ataxia-telangiectasia (208900). |
276700::tyrosinemia type I (TYRSN1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the FAH gene (613871), encoding fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase, on chromosome 15q25.|Hereditary tyrosinemia type I is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by deficiency of fumarylacetoacetase (FAH), the last enzyme of tyrosine degradation. The disorder is characterized by progressive liver disease and a secondary renal tubular dysfunction leading to hypophosphatemic rickets. Onset varies from infancy to adolescence. In the most acute form patients present with severe liver failure within weeks after birth, whereas rickets may be the major symptom in chronic tyrosinemia. Untreated, patients die from cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma at a young age (summary by Bliksrud et al., 2005). |Tyrosinemia type II (TYRSN2; 276600), also known as Richner-Hanhart syndrome, is caused by mutation in the TAT gene (613018) on chromosome 16q22. Tyrosinemia type III (TYRNS3; 276710) is caused by mutation in the HPD gene (609695) on chromosome 12q24.|Among the children of first-cousin parents, Lelong et al. (1963) observed 2 sons with cirrhosis, Fanconi renotubular syndrome, and marked increase in plasma tyrosine. In the sib most extensively observed, hepatosplenomegaly was discovered at 3 months of age and rickets at 18 months. Malignant changes developed in the liver, and death from pulmonary metastases occurred shortly before his 5th birthday. The author suggested that the basic defect concerns an enzyme involved with tyrosine metabolism. Earlier, Himsworth (1950) described a similar case. Zetterstrom (1963) studied 7 cases coming from an isolated area of southwestern Sweden. Halvorsen et al. (1966) gave details on 6 cases from Norway. |Perry et al. (1965) described 3 sibs (2 females and a male) in 1 sibship who died in the third month after an illness characterized by irritability and progressive somnolence, and terminally by a tendency to bleed and hypoglycemia. A peculiar odor was noted. Pathologic changes included hepatic cirrhosis, renal tubular dilatation, and pancreatic islet hypertrophy. Biochemical studies showed generalized amino aciduria, marked elevation of methionine in the serum, and a disproportionately high urinary excretion of methionine. Alpha-keto-gamma-methiolbutyric acid was present in the urine and may account for the peculiar odor. The hypertrophy of the islets of Langerhans was probably due to stimulation by methionine or one of its metabolites. It seems likely that the disorder in the patients of Perry et al. (1965) was tyrosinemia since hypermethioninemia occurs secondary to liver failure in that condition (Scriver et al., 1967; Gaull et al., 1970). |Gentz et al. (1965) described 7 patients in 4 families with multiple renal tubular defects like those of the de Toni-Debre-Fanconi syndrome, nodular cirrhosis of the liver, and impaired tyrosine metabolism. In the urine, p-hydroxyphenyllactic acid was excreted in unusually large amounts. A total lack of liver p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate oxidase activity was demonstrated. Tyrosine-alpha-ketoglutarate transaminase was normal. |Scriver et al. (1967) identified the disease in 35 French Canadian infants, of whom 16 were sibs (i.e., 2 or more in each of several families). Marked tyrosinemia and tyrosyluria were present. The urine contained parahydroxyphenylpyruvic acid (PHPPA) and lactic and acetic derivatives. Loading test with tyrosine and with PHPPA suggested deficient p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate oxidase activity, which was confirmed by assay of liver biopsy samples. In stage I, infants exhibit hepatic necrosis and hypermethioninemia. In stage II, nodular cirrhosis and chronic hepatic insufficiency without hypermethioninemia are found. In stage III, renal tubular damage (Baber syndrome), often with hypophosphatemic rickets, appears. Low tyrosine diet arrested progression of the disease. |Lindblad et al. (1987) suggested that cardiomyopathy, usually subclinical, is a frequent finding.|Mitchell et al. (1990) pointed out the significance of neurologic crises in this disorder. They found that of 48 children with tyrosinemia identified on neonatal screening since 1970, 20 (42%) had neurologic crises that began at the mean age of 1 year and led to 104 hospital admissions. These abrupt episodes of peripheral neuropathy were characterized by severe pain with extensor hypertonia (in 75%), vomiting or paralytic ileus (69%), muscle weakness (29%), and self-mutilation (8%). In 8 children, mechanical ventilation was required because of paralysis and 14 of the 20 children died. Between crises, most survivors regained normal function. They could identify no reliable biochemical marker for the crises. Urinary excretion of delta-aminolevulinic acid, a neurotoxic intermediate of porphyrin biosynthesis, was elevated during both crises and asymptomatic periods. Electrophysiologic studies and neuromuscular biopsies showed axonal degeneration and secondary demyelination. Thus, they demonstrated that episodes of acute, severe, peripheral neuropathy are common in this disorder and resemble the crises of the neuropathic porphyrias. |Kvittingen et al. (1985) described a family that may have had a pseudodeficiency gene. Presumed homozygotes for this gene had levels of fumarylacetoacetase activity only slightly higher than those in patients with tyrosinemia. No clinical abnormalities were observed. Kvittingen et al. (1992) studied a healthy 41-year-old female homozygous for the pseudodeficiency gene and 3 tyrosinemia families in which one or both parents were compound heterozygotes for the tyrosinemia and pseudodeficiency genes. Only 2 of 7 patients with typical chronic tyrosinemia had definite immunoreactivity in fibroblasts when bovine fumarylacetoacetase antibodies were used; none of the patients with the acute type had detectable immunoreactive protein in fibroblast extracts. Twenty-eight patients with hereditary tyrosinemia of various clinical phenotypes were tested. The pseudodeficiency gene product gave almost no detectable immunoreactivity in fibroblasts. |
276880::urocanase deficiency is caused by mutation in the UROC1 gene (613012) on chromosome 3q21. One such family has been reported.|Yoshida et al. (1971) reported a case of urocanase deficiency. Kalafatic et al. (1980) reported 2 sisters with this deficiency. Both had severe mental retardation, short stature, blond hair, and blue eyes. They showed periods of aggression and periods of exaggerated affection-seeking. The family lived near Zagreb, Yugoslavia. The paternal grandmother and great-grandmother were regarded as 'strange' and died at 35 and 42 years, respectively. The father became obviously 'strange' at age 29 years. He was moody, 'agitated,' and aggressive toward family and neighbors. He was ataxic with dysarthric speech and died after 6 years of treatment. Autopsy showed 'encephalitis disseminata perivenosa' and diffuse cortical atrophy. Peroral loading with histidine and intravenous infusion of urocanic acid showed that the underlying metabolic defect was a block of the conversion of urocanic acid into formiminoglutamic acid (FIGLU), which is catalyzed by urocanase. Histidase was normal in liver and skin; urocanase was absent in liver. The relationship of the sisters' defect to the disorder in the ancestors in the previous 3 generations was unclear. |Espinos et al. (2009) studied a 19-year-old Spanish woman who had urocanic aciduria, mental retardation, and intermittent ataxia. She had normal development in the first year of life and walked unaided at 16 months, but the parents observed clumsy performance. At 4 years of age, she had 3 episodes of severe ataxia that lasted approximately 3 weeks each, coinciding with recurrent infections and slowly resolving over the following weeks. Brain MRIs at 5 years and 9 years of age were normal. At age 19 years, she had slight tremor and nystagmus, walked with a broad-based gait, and had very clumsy performance. Cognitive evaluation rated her IQ at 54. |
176200::variegate porphyria is caused by heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding protoporphyrinogen oxidase (PPOX; 600923) on chromosome 1q23.|Variegate porphyria is characterized by cutaneous manifestations, including increased photosensitivity, blistering, skin fragility with chronic scarring of sun-exposed areas, and postinflammatory hyperpigmentation. Acute exacerbations of VP include abdominal pain, the passage of dark urine, and neuropsychiatric symptoms that characterize the acute hepatic porphyrias, such as bulbar paralysis, quadriplegia, motor neuropathy, and weakness of the limbs. In heterozygotes, PPOX activity is decreased by about 50% (summary by Frank et al., 1998). |Adults with variegate porphyria show a variable picture of skin symptoms, including hyperpigmentation and hypertrichosis, associated with acute attacks like those of acute intermittent porphyria (176000). Attacks may be protracted and followed by prolonged disability. Attacks are often drug-induced and show the classic neuropathic symptoms and signs, such as abdominal pain, constipation, tachycardia and hypertension, and muscular paralysis and sensory disturbances; disorientation and frank psychosis may be conspicuous features. The condition is characterized by elevated fecal levels of protoporphyrin and coproporphyrin at all times, with increased urine porphyrins at times, and an increase in urinary levels of the porphyrin precursors porphobilinogen (PBG) and delta-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) during the acute attack (Dean, 1972; Mustajoki, 1978; Meyer and Schmid, 1978). Iron overload is a well-established precipitating or aggravating factor in porphyria variegata. |Homozygous Variant of Variegate Porphyria|The rare homozygous variant of VP is characterized by severe PPOX deficiency, onset of photosensitization by porphyrins in early childhood, skeletal abnormalities of the hand, and, less constantly, short stature, mental retardation, and convulsions (Roberts et al., 1998). |Homozygous variegate porphyria was reported in 2 Czech sibs by Korda et al. (1984, 1985) and in 2 unrelated English patients by Murphy et al. (1986). In the family of Korda et al. (1984) and the first case of Murphy et al. (1986), both parents were, by the biochemical evidence, heterozygotes. Photosensitivity dating from the first year or so of life, growth retardation, and raised red cell protoporphyrin concentration with 60 to 70% zinc chelation were the seemingly characteristic features. The Czech sibs also had mental retardation and nystagmus. |Mustajoki et al. (1987) described a child with apparent homozygous variegate porphyria. The proband developed a severe bullous skin disease a few days after birth, followed by increased fragility and keloid scarring of exposed skin in spring and summer. Lymphocyte protoporphyrinogen oxidase was very low in the patient and half normal in both parents (who were first cousins). The patient had high concentration of protoporphyrin in red cells. |Coakley et al. (1990) described an unusual form of variegate porphyria in a young girl with epilepsy, mental retardation, and premature adrenarche. Symptoms of porphyria commenced about the age of 12 years and death occurred about 18 months later. The patient had a very low level of protoporphyrinogen oxidase activity in her cultured fibroblasts, whereas both parents had half normal activity of the enzyme in lymphocytes. Coakley et al. (1990) suggested the patient was homozygous. Two of the subjects with homozygous VP described by Korda et al. (1984) were similar to this patient in that they had severe neurologic symptoms which included convulsions and mental retardation. The ratio of 5-beta to 5-alpha steroids in urine suggested a defect in hepatic 5-alpha-reductase activity in the patient of Coakley et al. (1990). This presumed defect as well as anticonvulsant therapy may have contributed to the severity of the patient's condition. |Homozygous variegate porphyria was also described by Norris et al. (1990) and by Gandolfo et al. (1991). |
201475::very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (ACADVL; 609575) on chromosome 17p13.|Inborn errors of mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation include medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (201450), short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (201470), and very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.|VLCAD deficiency can be classified clinically into 3 forms: a severe early-onset form with high incidence of cardiomyopathy and high mortality; an intermediate form with childhood onset, usually with hypoketotic hypoglycemia and more favorable outcome; and an adult-onset, myopathic form with isolated skeletal muscle involvement, rhabdomyolysis, and myoglobinuria after exercise or fasting (Andresen et al., 1999). |Patients reported with long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCAD) deficiency before VLCAD deficiency was defined were later found to have VLCAD deficiency (Strauss et al., 1995; Roe and Ding, 2001). |Hale et al. (1985) reported 3 unrelated children who presented in early childhood with nonketotic hypoglycemia and episodes of cardiorespiratory arrest associated with fasting. Other features included hepatomegaly, cardiomegaly, and hypotonia. Total plasma carnitine concentration was low. The findings suggested a defect in mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation. Specific assays showed that the activity of long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase was less than 10% of control values in fibroblasts, leukocytes, and liver. Activities of medium-chain, short-chain, and isovaleryl CoA dehydrogenases were normal. With cultured fibroblasts, CO2 evolution from medium-chain and short-chain fatty acids was normal and that from long-chain fatty acids was reduced. As in medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, dicarboxylic acids in the urine and relatively low urinary beta-hydroxybutyrate levels were formed by omega-oxidation of fatty acids in the cytoplasm. The parents had intermediate levels of enzyme activity, suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance. |Hale et al. (1985) also demonstrated deficiency of the long-chain dehydrogenase in fibroblasts from 2 sibs reported by Naylor et al. (1980) with features similar to those in their 3 patients. |Treem et al. (1991) described an affected infant and compared the case with 7 previously published cases. The infant had hypotonia and marked cardiac enlargement as well as hypoglycemia. |Ribes et al. (1992) provided follow-up information on a patient described by Riudor et al. (1986). LCAD deficiency had been documented in the fibroblasts from the patient and treatment with frequent low-fat high-carbohydrate feedings, riboflavin, and carnitine reduced the frequency and intensity of crises. However, the patient developed progressive cardiomegaly and persistent hepatosplenomegaly. Following a crisis similar to those suffered previously, he went into cardiorespiratory arrest at the age of 4.5 years. |Bertrand et al. (1993) reported deficiency of very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase in a 2-year-old girl with a fatty acid oxidation defect. |Yamaguchi et al. (1993) identified VLCAD deficiency in 3 patients previously diagnosed with LCAD deficiency. |Aoyama et al. (1993) reported 2 male patients with VLCAD deficiency as evidenced by in vitro findings of very low palmitoyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity and lack of immunoreactivity to antibody against the VLCAD protein. One patient presented at age 3 months with hypoketotic hypoglycemia, hepatocellular disease, and cardiomyopathy. At autopsy, there was severe hepatocellular injury and marked lipid accumulation in many tissues. The other patient, reported by Tonsgard et al. (1991) as an instance of an unexplained defect of long-chain fatty acid oxidation, presented at age 4 months with hypoglycemia, hepatocellular dysfunction, and cardiomyopathy. Laboratory testing revealed hyperammonemia and increased urinary levels of adipate and sebacate. Microscopic examination at autopsy showed lipid accumulation in many tissues. |Ogilvie et al. (1994) reported a 21-year-old man with VLCAD who presented with a 5-year history of exercise-induced muscle pain and myoglobinuria. Residual enzyme activity was approximately 10% of control values. The patient was able to decrease the amount of pain if he ate a carbohydrate snack before or during the exercise. |Aoyama et al. (1995) used immunoblotting to analyze for VLCAD protein deficiency in skin fibroblasts from 26 patients suspected of having a disorder of mitochondrial beta-oxidation; 7 samples contained undetectable or trace levels of the VLCAD enzyme. Clinically, all patients with VLCAD deficiency exhibited cardiac disease, and at least 4 of them presented with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The biochemical work suggested a heterogeneity of mutations causing deficiency in the 7 patients. Six of the 7 patients studied by Aoyama et al. (1995) were North American Caucasians, and 1 was Asian. Clinical onset of abnormality was within 4 months after birth, 75% died within 2 months after onset, and all patients had liver dysfunction and cardiac disease. |Fukao et al. (2001) reported a 14-year-old Japanese girl who presented with recurrent myalgia and elevated serum creatine kinase after moderate exercise. She was diagnosed as having a myopathic form of VLCAD deficiency confirmed by genetic analysis (609575.0013; 609575.0014). Her first clinical symptom of the disease appeared at age 6. She had never had hypoglycemic attacks, hepatomegaly, or cardiomyopathy. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the mutant proteins were temperature-sensitive and retained residual activity at 30 degrees Celsius. Fukao et al. (2001) concluded that the temperature-sensitive mild mutations in both alleles resulted in this patient's very mild manifestations. |Brown et al. (2014) reported complete neuropsychologic assessment of 7 children with VLCAD deficiency, and 1 additional child with partial assessment. There were 2 females and 6 males in this group. IQs ranged from average to superior. No deficits were found in fine or gross motor skills. One patient had mild language deficit, and 2 had previously required speech therapy. Verbal memory, attention, and executive functioning skills were generally average or above average; visual memory scores were mostly above average. One child was identified as having social skills deficits, and 2 as having behavioral problems. One child rated high on an autism spectrum subscale, and another was formally diagnosed with ASD. Brown et al. (2014) concluded that VLCAD deficiency does not have significant impact on cognitive or motor skills. |Pena et al. (2016) retrospectively analyzed early outcomes for individuals who were diagnosed with VLCAD deficiency by newborn screening in the USA and described initial presentations, diagnosis, clinical outcomes, and treatment in a cohort of 52 individuals aged 1 to 18 years. Maternal prenatal symptoms were not reported, and most newborns remained asymptomatic. Cardiomyopathy was uncommon in the cohort, diagnosed in 2 of 52 cases. Elevations in creatine kinase were a common finding, and usually first occurred during the toddler period (1 to 3 years of age). Of the 14 subjects with elevated creatine kinase, 11 developed rhabdomyolysis. Diagnostic evaluations required several testing modalities, most commonly plasma acylcarnitine profiles and molecular testing. Functional testing, including fibroblast acylcarnitine profiling and white blood cell or fibroblast enzyme assay, is a useful diagnostic adjunct if uncharacterized mutations are identified. |Evans et al. (2016) reported on 22 patients with VLCAD deficiency identified by newborn screening in Victoria, Australia. Patients were treated with a low natural-fat diet which was relaxed at age 5 if the patients had been asymptomatic, but supplementation with medium-chain triglyceride (MCT) oil before and after physical activity was recommended to all. All patients were doing well with no episodes of encephalopathy or hypoglycemia, but 3 patients had episodes of muscle pain with or without rhabdomyolysis. |
277460::ataxia with vitamin E deficiency (AVED) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the TTPA gene (600415) on chromosome 8q12.|Harding et al. (1985) described a young woman with spinocerebellar degeneration thought to be due to a selective defect in vitamin E absorption. There was no evidence of fat malabsorption. Binder et al. (1967) suggested a relationship between neurologic dysfunction and vitamin E deficiency in patients with chronic steatorrhea. This was subsequently confirmed in patients with abetalipoproteinemia (200100), the most severe state of vitamin E deficiency known. When studied at age 23, the proband had no vitamin E in the serum. A progressive neurologic disorder comprising ataxia, areflexia and marked loss of proprioception developed at age 13. She also had increased serum concentrations of cholesterol, triglyceride and beta-lipoprotein and showed xanthelasmata and xanthomas of the Achilles tendon. Improvement in the neurologic disease accompanied administration of vitamin E. The proband's mother had tendinous xanthomas and elevated serum cholesterol. Both parents and 4 brothers had low or low-normal serum vitamin E levels consistent with the heterozygous state of a disorder for which the proband was homozygous. The lipid disturbance in the proband and her mother was thought to be familial hypercholesterolemia. Evidence was cited that the mechanism of absorption of vitamin E may be different from that for the other fat-soluble vitamins. A progressive development of ataxia and areflexia with a 'dying back' of the peripheral nerves, along with spinocerebellar degeneration, are characteristic of vitamin E deficiency. Several patients have been described who, like the patient of Harding et al. (1985), had neurologic abnormalities similar to those of vitamin E deficiency but had no evidence of fat malabsorption (Burck et al., 1981; Kohlschutter et al., 1988; Laplante et al., 1984; Krendel et al., 1987; Yokota et al., 1987; Sokol et al., 1988). Sokol et al. (1988) studied 2 affected sisters, a brother, and an isolated case in another family. No consanguinity was observed, but no other affected persons were demonstrated by studies in these families. These patients all had normal lipid absorption, gastrointestinal, pancreatic, and intestinal function, and lipoproteins, but when consuming a normal diet, they had exquisitely low plasma vitamin E levels and developed neurologic abnormalities characteristic of vitamin E deficiency. With the addition of daily vitamin E supplements (400-1,200 IU) to the diet, normal plasma vitamin E levels could be maintained and in several patients improvement in neurologic function was reported. When vitamin E supplementation was interrupted, plasma tocopherol fell sharply to suboptimal levels. |Selective vitamin E deficiency shows clinical features very similar, and in some cases identical, to those of Friedreich ataxia (FRDA; 229300). Ben Hamida et al. (1993) pointed out that cardiomyopathy like that in Friedreich ataxia had not been reported in patients with isolated vitamin E deficiency. |
193200::For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of vitiligo susceptibility, see VAMAS1 (606579).|(vitiligo-associated multiple autoimmune disease susceptibility mapping to chromosome 17p13 can be accounted for by variants in the NALP1 gene (NLRP1; 606636), which encodes NACHT leucine-rich repeat protein-1, a regulator of the innate immune system.Generalized vitiligo is an autoimmune disease characterized by melanocyte loss, which results in patchy depigmentation of skin and hair, and is associated with an elevated risk of other autoimmune diseases. It is a genetically complex disorder involving multiple susceptibility genes and unknown environmental triggers. Patients with generalized vitiligo have elevated frequencies of other autoimmune diseases, suggesting that these diseases involve shared genetic components (summary by Jin et al., 2010). McKusick (1983) observed a family in Maine in which vitiligo occurred in many members. The occurrence of halo nevi (see 234300) as a striking feature of the proband and some others suggested that this is a manifestation of vitiligo. Thyrotoxicosis and pernicious anemia were also present in the family. The family came from a moderately inbred community and the parents of the proband were probably remotely related.)|
277900::Wilson disease is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the ATP7B gene (606882) on chromosome 13q14.|Wilson disease is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by dramatic build-up of intracellular hepatic copper with subsequent hepatic and neurologic abnormalities.|De Bie et al. (2007) provided a detailed review of the molecular pathogenesis of Wilson disease. |In Wilson disease, the basal ganglia and liver undergo changes that express themselves in neurologic manifestations and signs of cirrhosis, respectively. A disturbance in copper metabolism is somehow involved in the mechanism. Low ceruloplasmin (117700) is found in the serum. Shokeir and Shreffler (1969) advanced the hypothesis that ceruloplasmin functions in enzymatic transfer of copper to copper-containing enzymes such as cytochrome oxidase. Supporting the hypothesis was the finding of markedly reduced levels of activity of cytochrome oxidase in Wilson disease and moderate reductions in heterozygotes. |The Kayser-Fleischer ring is a deep copper-colored ring at the periphery of the cornea which is frequently found in Wilson disease and is thought to represent copper deposits. Bearn and McKusick (1958) and Whelton and Pope (1968) described azure lunulae of the fingernails in patients with Wilson disease. These are presumably of the same significance as the Kayser-Fleischer ring and possibly arise by the same mechanism. Hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis are not uncommon in patients with Wilson disease. Hypercalciuria associated with this disorder was first reported by Litin et al. (1959). Wiebers et al. (1979) observed renal stones in 7 of 54 patients with Wilson disease. Penicillamine therapy was accompanied by a decrease in urinary calcium excretion to normal values in 3 patients, but hypercalciuria persisted in 3. Azizi et al. (1989) described hypercalciuria and nephrolithiasis as presenting signs in Wilson disease and postulated tubular defect in calcium reabsorption. Hoppe et al. (1993) described a 17-year-old male with a 6-year history of hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and nephrolithiasis, in whom Wilson disease was finally diagnosed. |Bearn (1960) suggested that Jewish WND patients from eastern Europe are different from other groups of patients in that the age at onset is later, the disease is generally milder, and the serum copper and serum ceruloplasmin levels are 'particularly liable to be of normal concentration.' Bonne-Tamir et al. (1990) provided a full analysis of Wilson disease in Israel. |From a study of 28 Canadian families, Cox et al. (1972) suggested that there are at least 3 forms of Wilson disease. In a rare 'atypical form,' the heterozygotes show about 50% of the normal level of ceruloplasmin. This gene may have been of German-Mennonite derivation. In the 2 typical forms heterozygotes have normal ceruloplasmin levels, although they can be identified by decreased reappearance of radioactive copper into serum and ceruloplasmin. The authors referred to the 2 'typical forms' as the Slavic and the juvenile type. The Slavic type has a late age of onset and is predominantly a neurologic disease. The juvenile type, which occurs in western Europeans and several other ethnic groups, has onset before age 16 years and is frequently a hepatic disease. Czaja et al. (1987) demonstrated reduced ceruloplasmin gene transcription in 4 patients with Wilson disease (44% of controls). Low levels of ceruloplasmin are a normal finding in the newborn (Shokeir, 1971). |In Israel, Passwell et al. (1977) observed that Arab patients show an earlier age of onset and more severe course than Jewish patients. Within families of both ethnic groups, age of onset and type of disease show a close correlation. Thus, the authors concluded that the interethnic differences may reflect different mutations. |Fitzgerald et al. (1975) described a 57-year-old man with liver disease that they concluded represented Wilson disease. Ross et al. (1985) described a patient who was found to have hepatosplenomegaly at age 51, developed hand tremor at 52, and was having difficulty with hand dexterity at 55. The diagnosis of Wilson disease was made at age 58 on the basis of urinary, serum, and hepatic copper studies and liver histology, and despite the absence of Kayser-Fleischer rings. Wilson disease is not generally considered in patients over 30 years of age who present with liver disease and without neurologic signs. Danks et al. (1990) reported 4 such cases: 2 men, aged 43 and 48, and 2 women, aged 44 and 58. The 58-year-old woman had been ill for only 1 week and died in 36 hours of acute hepatorenal failure. Her sister had died of cirrhosis and liver failure at age 28. Alcohol intake was minimal or completely avoided in all. None of the known hepatitis viruses could be identified and no autoantibodies were detected. |Kuan (1987) demonstrated manifestations of myocardial involvement in Wilson disease. The occurrence of chondrocalcinosis and osteoarthritis in Wilson disease may be due to copper accumulation similar to the arthropathy of hemochromatosis (HFE; 235200) (Menerey et al., 1988). |Starosta-Rubinstein et al. (1987) correlated clinical manifestations with the findings of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain. Van Wassenaer-van Hall et al. (1995) also used cranial MRI to study WND patients. Although the most striking findings on their MRI scan were abnormalities of the basal ganglia in generalized cerebral atrophy, they also noted subtle white matter abnormalities in some WND patients, particularly at the dentatorubrothalamic, pontocerebellar, and corticospinal tracts. |From Slovenia, Ferlan-Marolt and Stepec (1999) reported a 24-year-old woman with fulminant Wilsonian hepatitis accompanied by hemolytic anemia and leading to death in a few weeks. Kayser-Fleischer rings were said to have been absent, and there were no neurologic abnormalities until the development of the flapping tremor of hepatic failure in the last days of life. |Gu et al. (2000) studied mitochondrial function and aconitase activity in Wilson disease liver tissue and compared the results with those in a series of healthy controls and patients without Wilson disease. There was evidence of severe mitochondrial dysfunction in the livers of patients with Wilson disease. Enzyme activities were decreased as follows: complex I by 62%, complex II+III by 52%, complex IV by 33%, and aconitase by 71%. These defects did not seem to be secondary to penicillamine use, cholestasis, or poor hepatocellular synthetic function. Gu et al. (2000) stated that the pattern of enzyme defects suggests that free radical formation and oxidative damage, probably mediated via mitochondrial copper accumulation, are important in Wilson disease pathogenesis, and that their results provide a rationale for a study of the use of antioxidants in Wilson disease. |Both Wilson disease and hemochromatosis (235200), characterized by excess hepatic deposition of iron and copper, respectively, produce oxidative stress and increase the risk of liver cancer. Because the frequency of p53 mutated alleles (191170) in nontumorous human tissue may be a biomarker of oxyradical damage and identify individuals at increased cancer risk, Hussain et al. (2000) determined the frequency of p53 mutated alleles in nontumorous liver tissue from WND and hemochromatosis patients. When compared with the liver samples from normal controls, higher frequencies of G:C to T:A transversions at codon 249, and C:G to A:T transversions and C:G to T:A transitions at codon 250 were found in liver tissue from WND cases, and a higher frequency of G:C to T:A transversions at codon 249 was also found in liver tissue from hemochromatosis cases. Sixty percent of WND and 28% of hemochromatosis cases also showed a higher expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase in the liver, which suggested nitric oxide as a source of increased oxidative stress. The results were consistent with the hypothesis that the generation of oxygen/nitrogen species and unsaturated aldehydes from iron and copper overload in hemochromatosis and WND causes mutation in the p53 tumor suppressor gene. |Hedera et al. (2002) reported a 13-year-old male with Wilson disease who exhibited leukoencephalopathy early in the disease course. MRI showed increased signal intensities in the basal ganglia and throughout the subcortical white matter in the frontal lobes, which later extended to the parietal and occipital lobes. |Takeshita et al. (2002) investigated 2 families with Wilson disease in which sibs showed different clinical phenotypes and different ages at onset. In the first family, the second and fourth male children demonstrated onset of the neurologic type of Wilson disease at 16 and 28 years of age, respectively, and the first female child developed the hepatic type at 38 years of age. In family 2, the second male child showed neurologic symptoms at 32 years of age and was diagnosed as having the hepatoneurologic type of Wilson disease; the 35-year-old first female child was found to have the hepatic type in familial screening. In both families, affected individuals were compound heterozygotes for mutations in the ATP7B gene. In the first family, the mutations were R778L (606882.0009) and R919G (606882.0014). In the second family, the mutations were 2511delA (606882.0015) and A874V (606882.0016). |Hlubocka et al. (2002) studied 42 patients with Wilson disease (19 men and 23 women, mean age 34 +/- 10 years) and 42 age- and sex-matched healthy volunteers. All subjects underwent complete echocardiographic examination; 24-hour Holter monitoring was performed in 23 Wilson disease patients. In comparison with healthy subjects, patients with Wilson disease had increased thickness of the interventricular septum and left ventricular (LV) posterior wall. While the 2 groups did not differ in LV mass index, relative LV wall thickness was significantly increased in the Wilson disease patients compared to control subjects. Concentric LV remodeling was present in 9 patients (21%) and LV hypertrophy in 1 patient. Diastolic filling and the frequency of valvular abnormalities were comparable in both groups. Twenty-four-hour Holter monitoring detected ECG abnormalities in 10 patients (42%), the most frequent findings being runs of supraventricular tachycardias and frequent supraventricular ectopic beats. |Jung et al. (2005) reported a 17-year-old Korean man with Wilson disease who presented with polyneuropathy at least 6 months before developing more typical symptoms. Initial symptoms included intermittent paresthesia and weakness in both hands and feet with normal sensory examination. Nerve conduction studies and sural nerve biopsy were consistent with a mixed demyelinating and axonal neuropathy. Treatment with penicillamine, zinc sulfate, and vitamin B6 resulted in clinical improvement. |
226980::Wolcott-Rallison syndrome is caused by homozygous mutation in the EIF2AK3 gene (604032), which encodes translation initiation factor 2-alpha kinase-3, on chromosome 2p11.|Wolcott-Rallison syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by permanent neonatal or early infancy insulin-dependent diabetes. Epiphyseal dysplasia, osteoporosis, and growth retardation develop at a later age. Other frequent multisystem manifestations include hepatic and renal dysfunction, mental retardation, and cardiovascular abnormalities (summary by Delepine et al., 2000). |Wolcott and Rallison (1972) described 2 brothers and a sister with infancy-onset diabetes mellitus and multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. Demineralization of bone with multiple fractures, tooth discoloration, and skin abnormalities were also noted. The parents were not related. Extracellular collagen fibers of varying thickness and intracellular collagen-like fibers suggest an abnormality in collagen synthesis and/or processing (Stoss et al., 1982). Stoss et al. (1982) reported affected brother and sister. Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus was discovered at 5 weeks of age in the girl and at 10 weeks in the boy. Limited hip abduction was noted in the girl at age 1 year and she ceased to grow after age 6. At age 12 she had pain in many joints and short-trunk dwarfism with normal facies. The liver extended 8 cm below the right costal margin and the spleen was also enlarged. The brother was found to have diabetes when he became comatose at age 10 weeks. (The 2 sibs were born 14 years apart.) He developed renal insufficiency from which he died at the age of 11. The radiologic findings in this disorder are those of a spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. Stoss et al. (1982) proposed that diabetes and chondrodysplasia are independent manifestations of a pleiotropic gene. Mauriac syndrome is the designation given dwarfism with hepatosplenomegaly and unregulated IDDM in children or adolescents. Glycosylation of connective tissue proteins, comparable to that which results in hemoglobin A1c, produces phenotypic changes, e.g., stiff joints in the hands. |Al-Gazali et al. (1995) described this syndrome in 2 brothers born to consanguineous Omani parents. Both children presented with diabetes, which was diagnosed at the age of 2 months in 1 brother and at the age of 2 weeks in the other. The radiologic abnormalities in 1 brother (osteoporosis, mild platyspondyly, small flattened epiphyses, bilateral coxa valga with narrow iliac wings) were evident from the age of 6 months. The first child of this couple, a female infant, died at the age of 2 months after weight loss, irritability and diarrhea. None of these sibs had hepatomegaly. |Bonthron et al. (1998) described a family in which the proband, born to first-cousin parents, died at 2 years of age from the sequelae of poorly controlled diabetes. The child had gray-blue sclerae, high-arched palate, and absent teeth. There was thoracolumbar kyphosis and bowing of the femora with undertubulation and thin cortices of the long bones with osteopenia. In addition, there was severe brachycephaly and poor ossification of the skull and wormian bones. |Abdelrahman et al. (2000) described a 3-year-old Saudi boy with infantile onset of hyperglycemia, recurrent hepatitis, renal insufficiency, developmental delay, and skeletal epiphyseal dysplasia. Idiopathic recurrent self-resulting hepatitis and renal impairment appeared to be associated features in this case. Bin-Abbas et al. (2001) reported further details of the same patient. Bin-Abbas et al. (2002) described a brother and sister with similar features including infantile onset of hyperglycemia, recurrent hepatitis, renal insufficiency, developmental delay, epiphyseal dysplasia, and central hypothyroidism. |Durocher et al. (2006) described 2 apparently unrelated children with mutation-proven Wolcott-Rallison syndrome. The first infant was diagnosed with diabetes at 4 weeks of age and had multiple episodes of hepatitis; x-ray examination revealed demineralization and epiphyseal dysplasia of the long bones. At 4 years of age, the patient developed hyperglycemia without acidosis and died shortly after from multiorgan failure. The second infant was diagnosed with diabetes at 6 months of age; at 4 years of age, the patient was reexamined due to short stature and overweight, at which time spine x-rays showed diffuse demineralization of thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. At age 7, the patient was noted to have platyspondyly and diffuse demineralization of the spine as well as an atlantoaxial subluxation. The patient also had anemia that did not respond to treatment with iron. At age 8, the child continued to have short stature and obesity but had not developed any hepatic or renal problems. Durocher et al. (2006) concluded that there is no simple relationship between clinical manifestations and EIF2AK3 mutations. |
222300::Wolfram syndrome-1 (WFS1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding wolframin (WFS1; 606201) on chromosome 4p16.|Wolfram syndrome-1 is a rare and severe autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease characterized by diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, diabetes insipidus, and deafness (DIDMOAD). Additional clinical features may include renal abnormalities, ataxia, dementia or mental retardation, and diverse psychiatric illnesses. The minimal diagnostic criteria for Wolfram syndrome are optic atrophy and diabetes mellitus of juvenile onset. Hearing impairment in Wolfram syndrome is typically progressive and mainly affects the higher frequencies, but a small fraction of affected individuals have congenital deafness (summary by Rendtorff et al., 2011). |Autosomal dominant mutations in the WFS1 gene have been found to cause low-frequency nonsyndromic deafness (600965) as well as a Wolfram syndrome-like phenotype (614296) in which affected individuals have hearing impairment with diabetes mellitus and/or optic atrophy.|Genetic Heterogeneity of Wolfram Syndrome|Wolfram syndrome-2 (WFS2; 604928) is caused by mutation in the CISD2 gene (611507) on chromosome 4q24.|Wolfram syndrome is sometimes referred to as DIDMOAD (diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and deafness). Wolfram and Wagener (1938) found juvenile diabetes mellitus and optic atrophy in 4 of 8 sibs. Tyrer (1943) observed 3 of 8 sibs affected as well as 3 affected out of 4 offspring of a first-cousin marriage. Rose et al. (1966) reviewed the literature and described several cases including 2 unrelated patients, each the son of a consanguineous mating. They suggested that homozygosity for a gene with pleiotropic effects may be involved and that because of clinical heterogeneity more than one locus may be involved. All 7 patients described by Rose et al. (1966) were male. Affected females were described by others, e.g., Wolfram and Wagener (1938) and Tyrer (1943). Rorsman and Soderstrom (1967) described a family in which 3 sisters and a brother developed diabetes mellitus and optic atrophy in their teens. In one the optic atrophy appeared before the diabetes mellitus. Raiti et al. (1963) reported 2 sisters with both diabetes mellitus and diabetes insipidus. Diabetes mellitus developed at ages 9 and 5 years. Autosomal recessive inheritance was suggested. Histiocytosis X is an 'acquired' cause of double diabetes. Nevin (1974) reported a sibship of 10 of whom 2 girls, aged 14 and 11 years, had juvenile diabetes mellitus and optic atrophy. The younger girl also had diabetes insipidus. |Shaw and Duncan (1958) described 2 sisters and a niece with optic atrophy, nerve deafness, and diabetes mellitus. All 3 features had their onset in the first year of life. Ikkos et al. (1970) described first-cousin parents. Page et al. (1976) described 2 families; in both, the parents were first cousins, and 1 family had 4 affected sibs. Friedman et al. (1986) reported the birth of a healthy child from an affected woman. |Salih and Tuvemo (1991) described 2 Sudanese families with 2 affected boys in one and an affected boy and girl in the other. Diabetes mellitus was the first manifestation (at 3 to 8 years), followed by deafness and visual failure. The disease ended fatally in 1 patient at the age of 20 years. In the other 3, diabetes insipidus was confirmed using water deprivation tests for 8 hours. All 3 had severe bilateral hydronephrosis with dilated ureters and distended bladder without vesicoureteral reflux.|Wit et al. (1986) documented vasopressin deficiency in a child with Wolfram syndrome, thus confirming the central origin of the diabetes insipidus in this disorder. |The highly variable clinical picture of the Wolfram syndrome may include neurologic abnormalities such as nystagmus, mental retardation, and seizures. Rando et al. (1992) presented the cases of 2 unrelated patients who in addition to the 4 cardinal features had several other neurologic abnormalities and in whom MRIs showed widespread atrophic changes throughout the brain. |Only insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and bilateral progressive optic atrophy are necessary to make the diagnosis of DIDMOAD. Both may present in childhood, adolescence, or early adult life; typically, but not invariably, diabetes mellitus is detected first. Diverse neurologic symptoms in Wolfram syndrome homozygotes include hearing loss, urinary tract atony, ataxia, peripheral neuropathy, mental retardation, dementia, and psychiatric illnesses (Swift et al. (1990, 1991)). Swift et al. (1990) found that 60% of a series of 68 Wolfram syndrome homozygotes had episodes of severe depression, psychosis, or organic brain syndrome, as well as compulsive verbal and physical aggression. Heterozygous carriers of the Wolfram syndrome, estimated by Swift et al. (1991) to represent approximately 1% of the United States population, are thought to be predisposed to psychiatric illness. Swift et al. (1991) estimated that the risk that a Wolfram syndrome heterozygote will be hospitalized for psychiatric illness or will commit suicide is approximately 8 times that of a noncarrier. |Psychiatric illness appears to occur in most cases of Wolfram syndrome (Strom et al., 1998). The psychiatric manifestations are particularly diverse, and a predisposition for psychiatric disorders was proposed for heterozygous carriers by Swift et al. (1998). |Scolding et al. (1996) described 2 pairs of affected sibs with the cardinal features of Wolfram syndrome in addition exhibiting neurogenic respiratory failure, startle myoclonus, Parinaud syndrome, and axial rigidity. MRI of the brain demonstrated marked brainstem atrophy. |Gabreels et al. (1998) reported a disturbance in vasopressin precursor processing in the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei of patients with Wolfram syndrome. In patients with diabetes insipidus, the authors detected virtually no cellular immunoreactivity for processed vasopressin in the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei. On the other hand, a considerable number of cells immunoreactive for the vasopressin precursor were present in the paraventricular nucleus. The proprotein convertase PC2 (162151) and the molecular chaperone 7B2 (173120) were also absent. As expression of PC2 and 7B2 was detected in the nearby nucleus basalis of Meynert of 1 patient with Wolfram syndrome and in the anterior lobe of the other patient with Wolfram syndrome, the authors concluded that the absence of the 2 proteins in the paraventricular nucleus was not caused by mutations in their genes. Gabreels et al. (1998) concluded that in Wolfram syndrome patients with diabetes insipidus, not only does vasopressin neuron loss occur in the supraoptic nucleus, but there is also a defect in vasopressin precursor processing. |The maternally inherited diabetes-deafness syndrome of Ballanger and Wallace (520000) has phenotypic overlap with Wolfram syndrome.|Medlej et al. (2004) reported 31 Lebanese WFS patients belonging to 17 families. Criteria for diagnosis of WFS were the presence of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and optic atrophy unexplained by any other disease. Central diabetes insipidus was found in 87% of the patients, and sensorineural deafness confirmed by audiograms was present in 64.5%. Other less frequent features included neurologic and psychiatric abnormalities, urodynamic abnormalities, limited joint motility, cardiovascular and gastrointestinal autonomic neuropathy, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism in males, and diabetic microvascular disease (see 603933). New features, including heart malformations and anterior pituitary dysfunction, were recognized in some of the patients and contributed to the morbidity and mortality of the disease. |Haghighi et al. (2013) reported 2 unrelated consanguineous Iranian families with severe Wolfram syndrome, defined as having neurodegenerative involvement. In 1 family, 2 living affected adult male sibs had childhood-onset diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and neurogenic bladder; only 1 had adult-onset hearing loss. Each patient had fathered a healthy son, indicating that they had normal fertility. The brothers were homozygous for a missense mutation in the WFS1 gene (asp211-to-asn, D211N). In the second family, affected individuals had diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, hearing loss, neurogenic bladder, and psychiatric or cognitive problems. These individuals were homozygous for a truncating mutation in the WFS1 gene (gln486-to-ter, Q486X). Heterozygous family members in both families did not show any features of the disorder. |Hardy et al. (1999) and Sam et al. (2001) described Wolfram syndrome with a distinctive phenotype, namely, central respiratory failure. All of the patients were homozygous for a 4-bp deletion at position 2648-2651 in exon 8 of the WFS1 gene (606201.0012). In the patient with the 4-bp deletion reported by Hardy et al. (1999), there was severe brainstem atrophy and central respiratory failure requiring tracheostomy. Her affected sister had died at age 28 from brainstem atrophy and central respiratory failure. Five patients (from 3 families) who were heterozygous for the 4-bp deletion did not have respiratory failure. The 33-year-old patient reported by Sam et al. (2001) was diagnosed as having diabetes mellitus, a neurogenic bladder, and bilateral optic atrophy at the age of 10, 13, and 15, respectively. Audiometry was normal, and there was no evidence of diabetes insipidus. After an episode of respiratory arrest at age 32, she required intubation, ventilation, and subsequently, tracheostomy. MRI scan showed marked brainstem atrophy. |The Wolfram syndrome family (family K) unlinked to 4p that was studied by Collier et al. (1996) had 2 affected sibs in whom optic atrophy was first diagnosed at the age of 6 months and 2 years, respectively, more than a decade before the onset of diabetes mellitus. No period of normal vision was recorded, and symptoms of diabetes insipidus, renal dysfunction, and neurologic abnormalities were not present. In contrast, the affected subjects in the 11 families linked to 4p developed diabetes mellitus either at the same time or before the onset of optic atrophy, with the exception of 1 family, where optic atrophy developed 2 years earlier in 1 sib. Thus, although meeting the ascertainment criteria they had set for Wolfram syndrome, Collier et al. (1996) concluded that the phenotype in the unlinked family was atypical. |El-Shanti et al. (2000) found that 3 families linked to 4q (WFS2) contained several patients with profound upper gastrointestinal ulceration and bleeding. |
241080::Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome is caused by homozygous mutation in the C2ORF37 gene (DCAF17; 612515) on chromosome 2q31.|Woodhouse and Sakati (1983) reported a total of 7 Saudi Arabian individuals from 2 consanguineous families with a combination of hypogonadism, partial alopecia, diabetes mellitus, mental retardation, and deafness. The first family had 2 affected males and 2 affected females ranging in age from 16 to 22 years. The second family had 1 affected male and 1 affected female aged 47 and 40 years, respectively. One female from each family initially presented with primary amenorrhea and failure of sexual development. All patients were subsequently found to have hypogonadism with low estradiol or testosterone levels. Luteinizing hormone (LHB; 152780) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH; 136530) were increased in 2 women (hypergonadotropic ovarian failure) and normal in all the other patients. Three males had hypothalamic hypogonadotrophic testicular failure, and the remaining female had both hypothalamic and ovarian failure. Examination of 1 woman showed hypoplastic uterus, rudimentary fallopian tubes, and streak ovaries. Testicular histology of 1 man showed hypospermatogenesis and prominent Sertoli cells. There was variable loss of eyebrow and scalp hair, the latter being short, sparse, and fine. Hair loss was most severe in the older patients. All patients were diabetic with inappropriately low serum insulin levels. All patients had some degree of mental retardation, ranging from mild to severe. Four patients tested had sensorineural hearing loss. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed flattening of the T wave in all patients. |Devriendt et al. (1996) reported a brother and sister with a progressive extrapyramidal movement disorder with onset in adolescence associated with progressive alopecia and primary hypogonadism. The parents were first cousins once removed. Of 9 children total, 2 were affected and 1 died immediately after birth with severe arthrogryposis. Progressive learning problems, speech difficulties, and gait disturbance were first observed at age 12 years in the brother. He had decreased muscle strength and hand control, resulting in difficulties in fine motor skills such as writing. He was trained vocationally as a plumber. At age 17 years, he was seen by an endocrinologist for delayed puberty with absence of pubic and facial hair growth and prepubertal testes and penis. Neurologic examination at age 17 showed dystonia of the left arm and dysarthria. Progressive alopecia was observed in the early 20s. At age 47, he was able to walk very little and could produce only a few vocal sounds and had difficulty eating and drinking. His uncontrolled movements were dystonic and choreoathetotic, especially in the upper limbs. The sister showed learning difficulties in primary school and she required special education. At age 14 she developed progressive gait disturbance and was wheelchair-bound by her early 20s. Around the age of 14, a slowly progressive dysarthria and alopecia developed. There was primary amenorrhea, with no development of secondary female sexual characteristics. Facial appearance was very similar to that of her brother. |Gul et al. (2000) reported a 32-year-old Turkish man with mental retardation, partial alopecia, diabetes mellitus, hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism, deafness, and nervous system involvement. He had a eunuchoid appearance, flat occiput, triangular face, thin and sparse scalp hair (microscopic examination showed pili annulati), high forehead, frontal bossing, mild hypertelorism, and short and sparse eyebrows. Other features included downslanting palpebral fissures, a prominent nasal root, dental malocclusion, and a high-arched palate. Neurologic examination showed dysarthria, mild weakness in the distal muscles, sensory polyneuropathy, and equivocal Babinski sign. Other studies, such as central motor conduction time and brainstem auditory evoked responses, indicated involvement of both the central and peripheral nervous systems. A younger and older brother of the proband had diabetes mellitus and similar facial features, and the older brother died at age 30 of unknown cause. The parents were first cousins. Gul et al. (2000) referred to the disorder in the proband as 'Woodhouse and Sakati syndrome' and suggested autosomal recessive inheritance. |Al-Semari and Bohlega (2007) reported 12 Saudi families with an autosomal recessive multisystem disorder reminiscent of that described by Devriendt et al. (1996). Ten of the families were consanguineous. One of the families had been previously reported by Woodhouse and Sakati (1983) and 3 affected members had since developed a neurologic extrapyramidal syndrome with choreoathetoid movements and dystonia. The proband was unable to stand or walk, had scoliosis, hyperreflexia, and extensor plantar responses. Brain MRI of the proband, 1 sister, and 1 cousin showed diffuse white matter disease. Characteristic features in affected members of the other families included partial alopecia, dystonia, hypogonadism with lack of secondary sexual characteristics, cognitive impairment, deafness, diabetes mellitus, and signal abnormalities on brain MRI. Pelvic examination in female members of affected families showed infantile uterus and/or small ovaries. ECG showed abnormal T waves in 4 patients. Laboratory studies showed that 7 patients had increased FSH and LH, 4 men had low testosterone, and 2 women had low estradiol. Eight patients had biochemical evidence of hypothyroidism. The most striking and consistent laboratory abnormality was low serum insulin growth factor-1 (IGF1; 147440) with normal growth hormone (GH; 139250). Al-Semari and Bohlega (2007) suggested that the disorder could be an undescribed type of neuro-endocrine-ectodermal syndrome. |Medica et al. (2007) reported a 52-year-old woman of Croatian origin who had the phenotypic findings of Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome, including hypogonadism, sparse hair, diabetes mellitus, sensorineural hearing impairment, mild mental retardation, and flattened T waves on EKG. |Koshy et al. (2008) reported 3 sibs from a consanguineous Indian family with Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome who showed phenotypic variability. The female proband presented with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and had camptodactyly of the fourth and fifth fingers as did her affected brother. She and her affected sister had hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, whereas their brother had hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. A female cousin of the sibs was reported to have had alopecia and amenorrhea, and was pale and edematous when she died of severe diarrhea and dehydration at 32 years of age. |Schneider and Bhatia (2008) described a brother and sister from a consanguineous Middle Eastern family with adult-onset dystonia associated with sensorineural deafness, seizures, sensory neuropathy, mental retardation, alopecia, hypogonadism, and diabetes mellitus. The authors stated that although these features were suggestive of Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome, they also considered a diagnosis of mitochondrial disease, but mitochondrial mutations and muscle biopsy were negative; other causes of secondary dystonia were also excluded. |Steindl et al. (2010) studied 3 affected members of an Italian family with Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome who were found to have a homozygous nonsense mutation in the C2ORF37 gene (612515.0006) by Alazami et al. (2010) (see MOLECULAR GENETICS). The proband was a 58-year-old man who exhibited the full constellation of hypogonadism, alopecia, diabetes mellitus, cognitive impairment, and dystonia. His sister, who was reported to have died at 46 years of age of myocardial infarction and heart block, had autopsy findings that suggested the presence of alopecia and hypogonadism, with complete absence of the uterus. There was also a distant female relative in this pedigree who had similar clinical features to those of the proband; laparoscopy revealed absence of fallopian tubes, streak gonads, and hypoplastic uterus. She also had psychosis and hallucinations; Steindl et al. (2010) stated that psychiatric features should be added to the clinical spectrum of Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome. Examination of photographs at different ages demonstrated the appearance of progressive aging, a triangular face shape with prominent nasal root, and prominent ears with large ear lobes. There was progressive cognitive decline in these patients after normal development in childhood, culminating in severe cognitive impairment with little spontaneous speech in adulthood. In addition, anodontia presented from an early age in all 3 patients. |
308100::X-linked ichthyosis (XLI), which results from steroid sulfatase deficiency, is caused by mutation or deletion of the STS gene (300747) on chromosome Xp22. Most patients (90%) have deletions of the STS gene.|Some patients have larger deletions at Xp22.3 that encompass neighboring genes. These patients may present with mental retardation, Kallmann syndrome (KAL1; 308700), which comprises hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism and anosmia, features of X-linked chondrodysplasia punctata (CDPX1; 302950), short stature (SHOX; 312865), and/or ocular albinism (OA1; 300500) in addition to X-linked ichthyosis. These complicated forms of XLI thus represent contiguous gene deletion syndromes (Ballabio et al., 1989; Cuevas-Covarrubias and Gonzalez-Huerta, 2008). |X-linked ichthyosis is clinically characterized by widespread, dark brown, polygonal scales and generalized dryness. Cutaneous manifestations are present soon after birth and usually do not improve with age. The histopathology of XLI typically shows compact hyperkeratosis and slight acanthosis with a normal granular layer (summary by Takeichi and Akiyama, 2016). |X-linked ichthyosis is fundamentally the same disorder as placental steroid sulfatase deficiency, which is often first noted in the pregnant mother of affected males by decreased estrogen or delayed progression of parturition (Alperin and Shapiro, 1997). This is thus an example of affinity ('lumping') of phenotypes thought previously to be separate, the opposite of genetic heterogeneity. |Schnyder (1970) gave a useful classification of the inherited ichthyoses. |Hernandez-Martin et al. (1999) provided a comprehensive review of X-linked ichthyosis. They pointed out that among all genetic disorders X-linked ichthyosis shows one of the highest ratios of chromosomal deletions; complete deletion has been found in up to 90% of patients. |Takeichi and Akiyama (2016) reviewed inherited nonsyndromic forms of ichthyosis. |Csorsz (1928) reported a Hungarian family with X-linked ichthyosis. There were 2 affected females who were presumed to be homozygous. Schlammadinger et al. (1987) restudied the Hungarian family reported by Csorsz (1928). A female member of the family who as a child was described as having ichthyosis was found on restudy to have no sign of the disorder and was determined to be heterozygous by enzyme studies. A second affected female, presumably homozygous, was apparently not investigated by enzyme levels. No pregnancy-related complications, hypogenitalism, cryptorchidism, or deep corneal opacities were found in the family. |Orel (1929) found reports of 10 families with the X-linked form of ichthyosis in the literature.|Wells and Jennings (1967) reported that onset of the X-linked form of ichthyosis was at birth, and that the scalp, ears, neck, and some of the flexures were involved. There was more striking scaling on the abdomen than on the back, as well as scaling down the front of the leg onto the dorsum of the foot. |Sever et al. (1968) described deep corneal opacities in all of 17 males with X-linked ichthyosis. There were no overt symptoms. Jay et al. (1968) found ocular opacities as a late feature of X-linked ichthyosis including the carrier state; in their series, all patients over 25 years, but only 5 of 8 patients under 25, showed this abnormality. |Went et al. (1969) reported a large Dutch kindred with X-linked ichthyosis spanning 7 generations. None of those affected had obvious symptoms at birth, but developed scaling of the skin soon after or during the first year of life. The lesions were symmetrical and affected anterior and posterior surfaces of the upper and lower extremities, scalp, and trunk. Almost all patients had no involvement of the flexure areas, palms, or soles. The scales were black or gray in about half of patients, and white in the other half. All affected individuals reported improvement of the lesions during the summer. |Jobsis et al. (1976) was the first to publish the association between X-linked ichthyosis and steroid sulfatase deficiency.|Koppe et al. (1977, 1978) reported 3 pregnant women with decreased urinary estrogen secretion who gave birth to 3 boys that later developed ichthyosis at ages 2 to 8 months. The placenta in each case had decreased steroid sulfatase activity, which was also demonstrated in the skin of all 3 affected boys. Two of the families had a history consistent with X-linked recessive inheritance. Koppe et al. (1977, 1978) concluded that the sulfatase deficiency was a factor in the skin disorder. |France and Liggins (1969) reported a family from New Zealand in which several women had low estrogen production during pregnancy resulting from placental steroid sulfatase deficiency. The disorder was manifest clinically by delay in the onset of labor and relative refractoriness to oxytoxic agents. France and Downey (1974) showed that the deficiency was limited to the placenta; the mother did not show deficiency in her tissues. All affected pregnancies were males. Shapiro et al. (1978) reported that several male members of the family with placental steroid sulfatase deficiency reported by France and Liggins (1969) developed ichthyosis in the first months of life. Most had normal-appearing skin at birth. The trunk and extensor surfaces of the extremities were the most involved. One patient had deep corneal opacities found by slit-lamp examination. Noting that normal skin has sulfatase activity, Shapiro et al. (1978) postulated that the skin disorder in this family resulted from steroid-sulfatase deficiency. In a follow-up study, Shapiro et al. (1978) found decreased steroid sulfatase activity in fibroblasts isolated from 25 individuals with X-linked ichthyosis from 4 countries. Controls and patients with other forms of ichthyosis did not have decreased enzyme levels. Shapiro et al. (1978) stated that they knew of no patient with X-linked ichthyosis that did not have this specific enzyme defect, and concluded that the disorder results in the skin disease postnatally in affected males. The authors concluded that X-linked ichthyosis results from a common mutation affecting steroid sulfatase activity. |Macsai and Doshi (1994) described a 73-year-old man with X-linked ichthyosis and steroid sulfatase deficiency in whom superficial corneal opacities were found. The opacities were granular in nature, involving the subepithelial and anterior stromal layers. |Sever et al. (1968) described deep corneal opacities in 7 of 8 heterozygous females. There were no overt symptoms. |Went et al. (1969) reported mild abnormalities of the skin in about one-fourth of obligate heterozygous females of a large Dutch kindred with X-linked ichthyosis. |Solomon and Schoen (1971) reported a patient with XO Turner syndrome and ichthyosis, the latter of which was shown to be X-linked by pedigree and clinical features. |
278300::type I xanthinuria (XAN1) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the gene encoding xanthine dehydrogenase (XDH; 607633) on chromosome 2p23.|Xanthinuria, which was first described by Dent and Philpot (1954), is characterized by excretion of large amounts of xanthine in the urine and a tendency to form xanthine stones. Uric acid is strikingly diminished in serum and urine. Two clinically similar but distinct forms of xanthinuria are recognized. In type I there is an isolated deficiency of xanthine dehydrogenase, and in type II (XAN2; 603592) there is a dual deficiency of xanthine dehydrogenase and aldehyde oxidase (603592). Type I patients can metabolize allopurinol, whereas type II patients cannot (Simmonds et al., 1995). Xanthinuria also occurs in molybdenum cofactor deficiency (252150).|Type II xanthinuria is caused by mutation in the MOCOS gene (613274), which encodes the enzyme that sulfurates the molybdenum cofactor for XDH and AOX1 (602841).|Dickinson and Smellie (1959) described a well-studied single case, a child of unrelated, unaffected parents. Watts et al. (1964) described a 23-year-old woman in whom the disorder was suspected because of very low serum uric acid. There were no urinary calculi. Enzyme assays showed very little oxidation of both hypoxanthine and xanthine, presumably due to a defect in xanthine oxidase (EC 1.1.3.22), which catalyzes the oxidation of hypoxanthine to xanthine and also of xanthine to uric acid (Engelman et al., 1964; Sperling et al., 1971). Affected brothers have been observed (Wyngaarden, 1978). In the eighth known patient, a black male, studied by Chalmers et al. (1969), crystalline deposits occurred in skeletal muscle. A myopathy with crystalline deposits was described also by Engelman et al. (1964). An increased frequency of xanthinuria was reported in persons of Lebanese ancestry (Frayha et al., 1977). |Mateos et al. (1987) presented evidence of enhanced hypoxanthine salvage in studies of 2 sibs whose parents were first cousins. One, a boy aged 13, had passed multiple brownish-yellow stones during his first year of life and at 2 years of age had right ureteral lithiasis requiring surgical extraction. At age 6, reoperation for multiple pelvic and ureteral xanthine calculi was required. With increased water intake and sodium bicarbonate, he remained asymptomatic. His 22-year-old sister had been in good health since birth. Mateos et al. (1987) presented data indicating that xanthine is mainly derived from GTP to GMP degradation in hereditary xanthinuria both in the basal state and after intravenous fructose. This bypass of the hypoxanthine salvage pathway may explain why xanthine is the predominant urinary purine excreted in xanthinuria. |Maynard and Benson (1988) described hereditary xanthinuria in a 3-year-old Pakistani girl and her 5-year-old sister. The former had end-stage pyelonephritis and nonfunctioning hydronephrotic right kidney due to a xanthine calculus impacted in the right ureter. The older sister, who also had beta-thalassemia, was asymptomatic. |Fildes (1989) observed the unusual occurrence of urolithiasis due to hereditary xanthinuria in a 7-month-old Kuwaiti girl. Renal stones usually occur in older children or in adults. |Roca et al. (1992) reported an 80-year-old man with hereditary xanthinuria. He had coralliform lithiasis of the left kidney and a history of a surgical procedure on the left kidney at the age of 6 years. He also had a form of the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (see EDS1; 130000). |Mayaudon et al. (1998) described 2 unrelated adults with xanthinuria discovered incidentally because of hypouricemia. One was a 36-year-old man; the second was a 76-year-old woman who was found to have a radiotransparent renal stone. |
603592::xanthinuria type II (XAN2) is caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutation in the MOCOS gene (613274) on chromosome 18q12. One patient with a heterozygous mutation has been reported.|Xanthinuria type II is an autosomal recessive inborn error of metabolism resulting from a defect in the synthesis of the molybdenum cofactor, which is necessary for the 2 enzymes that degrade xanthine: XDH (607633) and AOX1 (602841). Most individuals with type II xanthinuria are asymptomatic, but some develop urinary tract calculi, acute renal failure, or myositis due to tissue deposition of xanthine. Laboratory studies show increased serum and urinary hypoxanthine and xanthine and decreased serum and urinary uric acid (summary by Ichida et al., 2001). |Two clinically similar but distinct forms of xanthinuria are recognized. In type I xanthinuria (XAN1; 278300), there is an isolated deficiency of xanthine dehydrogenase resulting from mutation in the XDH gene; in type II, there is a dual deficiency of xanthine dehydrogenase and aldehyde oxidase. Type I patients can metabolize allopurinol, whereas type II patients cannot (Simmonds et al., 1995).|Ichida et al. (2001) reported 2 unrelated Japanese men with xanthinuria type II. One was a 66-year-old man who presented with hypouricemia and chronic renal failure due to polycystic kidneys, whereas the other was a 45-year-old man with low serum uric acid and undetectable urinary uric acid. Both also had high serum hypoxanthine and xanthine. The diagnosis was confirmed by the allopurinol loading test; neither patient could properly metabolize allopurinol. |Peretz et al. (2007) reported 4 sibs, born of consanguineous Bedouin Arab parents, with xanthinuria type II. The proband was a 2-year-old girl who presented with a urinary tract infection and was found to have a renal stone. Laboratory studies showed severe hypouricemia and zero urinary uric acid. Serum and urinary hypoxanthine and xanthine were markedly elevated. An unrelated woman of Jewish descent with the disorder was also reported: she had urinary complaints in the absence of sonographic evidence of stones or infection. All patients were diagnosed with the disorder by the allopurinol loading test. |
