HMDB0004030::Plasma 21-deoxycortisol (21DF) is an excellent marker of 21-hydroxylase deficiency. Currently, it is the only marker able to detect heterozygous carriers with 21-hydroxylase deficiency after Adrenocorticotropic Hormone (ACTH) stimulation. The syndrome of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) comprises the spectrum of autosomal recessive enzymatic disorders that impair cortisol biosynthesis. The hormonal pattern and clinical manifestations result from hyperstimulation of the adrenal cortex by excessive production of ACTH, untied from the negative feedback exerted by reduced cortisol levels, and the ultimate accumulation of F precursors and androgens. These abnormalities predispose the female newborn to ambiguous genitalia (female pseudohermaphroditism) and precocious puberty that may occur in both sexes. CAH due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (21OHD) comprises nearly 90% of all cases, with an estimated worldwide incidence of 1 in 14,000 live births. Because 21-deoxycortisol (21DF) is an 11b-hydroxylase (11bOH) derivative of 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17OHP), its serum levels are parallel and proportionally elevated in patients with 21OHD but decreased or undetectable in those with 11b-hydroxylase deficiency (11bOHD), another genetic disorder. Due to the marked buildup of 17OHP in 21OHD, this precursor steroid can proceed directly to 11-hydroxylation, producing distinct elevations of 21DF (PMID: 16551734  , 10731638  ).|
HMDB0010375::CE(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a cholesterol fatty acid ester or simply a cholesterol ester (CE). Cholesterol esters are cholesterol molecules with long-chain fatty acids linked to the hydroxyl group. They are much less polar than free cholesterol and appear to be the preferred form for transport in plasma and for storage. Cholesterol esters do not contribute to membranes but are packed into intracellular lipid particles or lipoprotein particles. Because of the mechanism of synthesis, plasma cholesterol esters tend to contain relatively high proportions of C18 fatty acids. Cholesterol esters are major constituents of the adrenal glands and they also accumulate in the fatty lesions of atherosclerotic plaques. Cholesterol esters are also major constituents of the lipoprotein particles carried in blood (HDL, LDL, VLDL). The cholesterol esters in high-density lipoproteins (HDL) are synthesized largely by transfer of fatty acids to cholesterol from position sn-2 (or C-2) of phosphatidylcholine catalyzed by the enzyme lecithin cholesterol acyl transferase (LCAT). The enzyme also promotes the transfer of cholesterol from cells to HDL. As cholesterol esters accumulate in the lipoprotein core, cholesterol is removed from its surface thus promoting the flow of cholesterol from cell membranes into HDL. This in turn leads to morphological changes in HDL, which grow and become spherical. Subsequently, cholesterol esters are transferred to the other lipoprotein fractions LDL and VLDL, a reaction catalyzed by cholesteryl ester transfer protein. Another enzyme, acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT) synthesizes cholesterol esters from CoA esters of fatty acids and cholesterol. Cholesterol ester hydrolases liberate cholesterol and free fatty acids when required for membrane and lipoprotein formation, and they also provide cholesterol for hormone synthesis in adrenal cells.|
HMDB0003231::Vaccenic acid is present in all tissues. Present in virtually all lipid classes at a low concentration, 18:1n7 is present at about 25% of the concentration of 18:1n9 in most phospholipids. A notable exception is the phospholipid cardiolipin, which often contains as much 18:1n7 as 18:1n9 (www.lipomics.com).|
HMDB0002030::Fructosamine is a compound which can be considered as the result of a reaction between fructose and ammonia or an amine (with a molecule of water being released). A fructosamine is also formed when carbonyl group of glucose reacts with an amino group of a protein, as the double bond to oxygen moves from the end carbon atom to the next carbon atom and water is released. Fructosamines formed from blood proteins such as serum albumin are known as Glycated Serum Protein (GSP) or Glycated Albumin, and are used to identify the plasma glucose concentration over time and so assess diabetic control (wikipedia). Glucose molecules are joined to protein molecules to form stable ketoamines, or fructosamines, through glycation, a nonenzymatic mechanism involving a labile Schiff base intermediate and the Amadori rearrangement. The amount of fructosamine in serum is increased in diabetes mellitus owing to the abnormally high concentration of sugar in blood. The concentration of fructosamine in serum thus reflects the degree of glycemic control attained by the diabetic patient and is useful in monitoring the effectiveness of therapy in diabetes over a period of several weeks, in a manner analogous to the determination of glycated hemoglobin.| Of the analytical approaches used to measure fructosamine, affinity chromatography with m-aminophenylboronic acid and the nitroblue tetrazolium reduction method appear to be the most practical means for clinical chemists to assay fructosamine quickly, economically, and accurately. Fructosamine values can readily distinguish normal individuals and diabetic patients in good glycemic control from diabetics in poor control. Unlike glycated hemoglobin, which reflects the average blood sugar concentration over the past six to eight weeks, fructosamine reflects the average blood sugar concentration over the past two to three weeks. Thus a clinical advantage is that fructosamine responds more quickly to changes in therapy, thereby allowing for improved glycemic control. Fructosamine is used in conjunction with determinations of blood sugar and (or) of glycated hemoglobin, or by itself, the fructosamine assay can provide clinically useful information for the detection and control of diabetes (PMID: 3319287  ). Fructosamine is found to be associated with 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000015::Cortexolone is the precursor of cortisol. Accumulation of cortexolone can happen in a defect known as congenital adrenal hyperplasia, which is due to 11-beta-hydroxylase deficiency, resulting in androgen excess, virilization, and hypertension (PMID: 2022736  ). Cortexolone is a 17-hydroxycorticosteroid with glucocorticoid and anti-inflammatory activities (PubChem).|
HMDB0000053::Androstenedione is a delta-4 19-carbon steroid that is produced not only in the testis, but also in the ovary and the adrenal cortex. Depending on the tissue type, androstenedione can serve as a precursor to testosterone as well as estrone and estradiol. It is the common precursor of male and female sex hormones. Some androstenedione is also secreted into the plasma, and may be converted in peripheral tissues to testosterone and estrogens. Androstenedione originates either from the conversion of dehydroepiandrosterone or from 17-hydroxyprogesterone. It is further converted to either testosterone or estrone. The production of adrenal androstenedione is governed by ACTH, while production of gonadal androstenedione is under control by gonadotropins.|
HMDB0000374::It serves as an intermediate in the biosynthesis of hydrocortisone and gonadal steroid hormones. It is derived from progesterone via 17-hydroxylase, a P450c17 enzyme, or from 17-hydroxypregnenolone via 3β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/Δ5-4 isomerase (3β-HSD). 17-Hydroxyprogesterone is a natural progestin and in pregnancy increases in the third trimester primarily due to fetal adrenal production. This hormone is primarily produced in the adrenal glands and to some degree in the gonads, specifically the corpus luteum of the ovary. Normal levels are 3-90 ng/dl in children, and in women, 15-70 ng/dl prior to ovulation, and 35-290 ng/dl during the luteal phase. Measurements of levels of 17-hydroxyprogesterone are useful in the evaluation of patients with suspected congenital adrenal hyperplasia as the typical enzymes that are defective, namely 21-hydroxylase and 11β-hydroxylase, lead to a build-up of 17OHP. In contrast, the rare patient with 17α-hydroxylase deficiency will have very low or undetectable levels of 17OHP. 17OHP levels can also be used to measure contribution of progestational activity of the corpus luteum during pregnancy as progesterone but not 17OHP is also contributed by the placenta.|
HMDB0000234::Testosterone is the most important androgen in potency and quantity. Testosterone is synthesized and released by the Leydig cells that lie between the tubules and comprise less than 5% of the total testicular volume. testosterone diffuses into the seminiferous tubules where it is essential for maintaining spermatogenesis. Some binds to an androgen-binding protein (ABP) that is produced by the Sertoli cells and is homologous to the sex-hormone binding globulin that transports testosterone in the general circulation. The ABP carries testosterone in the testicular fluid where it maintains the activity of the accessory sex glands and may also help to retain testosterone within the tubule and bind excess free hormone. Some testosterone is converted to estradiol by Sertoli cell-derived aromatase enzyme. Leydig cell steroidogenesis is controlled primarily by luteinizing hormone with negative feedback of testosterone on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. The requirement of spermatogenesis for high local concentrations of testosterone means that loss of androgen production is likely to be accompanied by loss of spermatogenesis. Indeed, if testicular androgen production is inhibited by the administration of exogenous androgens then spermatogenesis ceases. This is the basis of using exogenous testosterone as a male contraceptive.| testosterone is converted to dihydrotestosterone by 5a-reductase type 2 (EC 1.3.1.22, SRD5A2), the androgen with the highest affinity for the androgen receptor. SRD5A2 deficiency illustrates the importance of dihydrotestosterone for external virilization, as individuals with this condition have normal male internal structures but their external genitalia are of female appearance. There is now clear evidence that the human fetal testis and also the fetal adrenal gland is capable of testosterone biosynthesis during the first trimester. Regardless of the source of androgen production, the target tissue responds by male sexual differentiation of the external genitalia by the end of the first trimester. It is clear that testicular damage may result in loss of testosterone production or the loss of spermatogenesis or both. Loss of androgen production results in hypogonadism, the symptoms of which reflect the functions of testosterone. Male hypogonadism is defined as failure of the testes to produce normal amounts of testosterone, combined with signs and symptoms of androgen deficiency. Systemic testosterone levels fall by about 1% each year in men. Therefore, with increasing longevity and the aging of the population, the number of older men with testosterone deficiency will increase substantially over the next several decades. Serum testosterone levels decrease progressively in aging men, but the rate and magnitude of decrease vary considerably. Approximately 1% of healthy young men have total serum testosterone levels below normal; in contrast, approximately 20% of healthy men over age 60 years have serum testosterone levels below normal. (PMID: 17904450  , 17875487  ).|
HMDB0001032::Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate or DHEA-S is the sulfated form of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). This sulfation is reversibly catalyzed by sulfotransferase 2A1 (SULT2A1) primarily in the adrenals, the liver, and small intestine. In the blood, most DHEA is found as DHEA-S with levels that are about 300 times higher than those of free DHEA. Orally-ingested DHEA is converted into its sulfate when passing through the intestines and liver. Whereas DHEA levels naturally reach their peak in the early morning hours, DHEAS levels show no diurnal variation. From a practical point of view, measurement of DHEA-S is preferable to DHEA since levels are more stable. DHEA (from which DHEA-S comes from) is a natural steroid prohormone produced from cholesterol by the adrenal glands, the gonads, adipose tissue, brain, and in the skin (by an autocrine mechanism). DHEA is the precursor of androstenedione, which can undergo further conversion to produce the androgen testosterone and the estrogens estrone and estradiol. DHEA is also a potent sigma-1 agonist. Serum dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate is a classic marker for adrenarche, and subsequently for the individual hormonal milieu (PMID: 10599744  ). Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate is an endogenously produced sex steroid that has been hypothesized to have anti-aging effects (PMID: 16960027  ). It also has been inversely associated with the development of atherosclerosis (PMID: 8956025  ).|
HMDB0005972::Tetrahydrodeoxycortisol (THS) is a mineralocorticoid, the main urinary metabolite of 11-deoxycortisol. THS excretion is significantly associated with tetrahydroaldosterone excretion, total androgen excretion, and cortisol metabolites. Aldosterone synthesis is highly heritable and is affected by genotype at CYP11B1. Variation in the region of chromosome 8 including the genes steroid 11-beta-hydroxylase (CYP11B1) and aldosterone synthase (CYP11B2) influences mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid metabolism; differences in 11-hydroxylation efficiency can have downstream effects on mineralocorticoid synthesis. Such effects may be of relevance to the development of low-renin essential hypertension. Genotype differences in CYP11B1 explains approximately 5% of the variance in urinary THS excretion in the population. Excretion of THS is heritable (19.4%) and the T-allele of the -344 C/T polymorphism of CYP11B2 is more strongly associated with higher THS levels than the C-allele. (PMID: 16984984  , 15522937  , 15272911  ).|
HMDB0006070::Pregnanetriol is a metabolite of 17-ALPHA-HYDROXYPROTESTERONE, normally produced in small quantities by the GONADS and the ADRENAL GLANDS, found in URINE. An elevated urinary pregnanetriol is associated with CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA with a deficiency of STEROID 21-HYDROXYLASE.|
HMDB0000190::Lactic acid is an organic acid. It is a chiral molecule, consisting of two optical isomers, L-lactic acid and D-lactic acid, with the L-isomer being the most common in living organisms. Lactic acid plays a role in several biochemical processes and is produced in the muscles during intense activity. In animals, L-lactate is constantly produced from pyruvate via the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in a process of fermentation during normal metabolism and exercise. It does not increase in concentration until the rate of lactate production exceeds the rate of lactate removal. This is governed by a number of factors, including monocarboxylate transporters, lactate concentration, the isoform of LDH, and oxidative capacity of tissues. The concentration of blood lactate is usually 1-2 mmol/L at rest, but can rise to over 20 mmol/L during intense exertion. There are some indications that lactate, and not glucose, is preferentially metabolized by neurons in the brain of several mammalian species, including mice, rats, and humans. Glial cells, using the lactate shuttle, are responsible for transforming glucose into lactate, and for providing lactate to the neurons.| Lactate measurement in critically ill patients has been traditionally used to stratify patients with poor outcomes. However, plasma lactate levels are the result of a finely tuned interplay of factors that affect the balance between its production and its clearance. When the oxygen supply does not match its consumption, organisms adapt in many different ways, up to the point when energy failure occurs. Lactate, being part of the adaptive response, may then be used to assess the severity of the supply/demand imbalance. In such a scenario, the time to intervention becomes relevant: early and effective treatment may allow tissues and cells to revert to a normal state, as long as the oxygen machinery (i.e. mitochondria) is intact. Conversely, once the mitochondria are deranged, energy failure occurs even in the presence of normoxia. The lactate increase in critically ill patients may, therefore, be viewed as an early marker of a potentially reversible state (PMID: 16356243  ).| When present in sufficiently high levels, lactic acid can act as an oncometabolite, an immunosuppressant, an acidogen, and a metabotoxin. An oncometabolite is a compound that promotes tumor growth and survival. An immunosuppressant reduces or arrests the activity of the immune system. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of lactic acid are associated with at least a dozen inborn errors of metabolism, including 2-methyl-3-hydroxybutyryl CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, biotinidase deficiency, fructose-1,6-diphosphatase deficiency, glycogen storage disease type 1A (GSD1A) or Von Gierke disease, glycogenosis type IB, glycogenosis type IC, glycogenosis type VI, Hers disease, lactic acidemia, Leigh syndrome, methylmalonate semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency, pyruvate decarboxylase E1 component deficiency, pyruvate dehydrogenase complex deficiency, pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency, and short chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SCAD deficiency). Locally high concentrations of lactic acid or lactate are found near many tumors due to the upregulation of lactate dehydrogenase (PMID: 15279558  ). Lactic acid produced by tumors through aerobic glycolysis acts as an immunosuppressant and tumor promoter (PMID: 23729358  ).| Indeed, lactic acid has been found to be a key player or regulator in the development and malignant progression of a variety of cancers (PMID: 22084445  ). A number of studies have demonstrated that malignant transformation is associated with an increase in aerobic cellular lactate excretion. Lactate concentrations in various carcinomas (e.g. uterine cervix, head and neck, colorectal region) at first diagnosis of the disease, can be relatively low or extremely high (up to 40 µmol/g) in different individual tumors or within the same lesion (PMID: 15279558  ). High molar concentrations of lactate are correlated with a high incidence of distant metastasis. Low lactate tumors (< median of approximately 8 µmol/g) are associated with both an overall longer and disease-free survival compared to high lactate lesions (lactate > approximately 8 µmol/g). Lactate-induced secretion of hyaluronan by tumor-associated fibroblasts creates a milieu favourable for cell migration and metastases (PMID: 22084445  ). An acidic environment (pH 6-6.5), which is common in many tumors, allows tumor cells to evade the immune response, and therefore allows them to grow unchecked. Locally high concentrations of lactic acid are known to markedly impede the function of normal immune cells and will lead to a loss of T-cell function of human tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (PMID: 22084445  ).| Lactic acid is also an organic acid and acts as a general acidogen. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart abnormalities, kidney abnormalities, liver damage, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of the untreated IEMs mentioned above. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development.|
HMDB0000062::Carnitine is not an essential amino acid; it can be synthesized in the body. However, it is so important in providing energy to muscles (including the heart) that some researchers are now recommending carnitine supplements in the diet, particularly for people who do not consume much red meat (the main food source for carnitine). Carnitine has been described as a vitamin, an amino acid, or a metabimin (i.e. an essential metabolite). Like the B vitamins, carnitine contains nitrogen and is very soluble in water, and to some researchers carnitine is a vitamin (Liebovitz 1984). It was found that an animal (yellow mealworm) could not grow without carnitine in its diet. However, as it turned out, almost all other animals, including humans, do make their own carnitine; thus, it is no longer considered a vitamin. Nevertheless, in certain circumstances, such as deficiencies of methionine, lysine, or vitamin C or kidney dialysis, carnitine shortages develop. Under these conditions, carnitine must be absorbed from food, and for this reason, it is sometimes referred to as a "metabimin" or a conditionally essential metabolite. Like the other amino acids used or manufactured by the body, carnitine is an amine. But like choline, which is sometimes considered to be a B vitamin, carnitine is also an alcohol (specifically, a trimethylated carboxy-alcohol). Thus, carnitine is an unusual amino acid and has different functions than most other amino acids, which are usually employed by the body in the construction of protein.| Carnitine is an essential factor in fatty acid metabolism in mammals. Its most important known metabolic function is to transport fat into the mitochondria of muscle cells, including those in the heart, for oxidation. This is how the heart gets most of its energy. In humans, about 25% of carnitine is synthesized in the liver, kidney, and brain from the amino acids lysine and methionine. Most of the carnitine in the body comes from dietary sources such as red meat and dairy products. Inborn errors of carnitine metabolism can lead to brain deterioration like that of Reye's syndrome, gradually worsening muscle weakness, Duchenne-like muscular dystrophy, and extreme muscle weakness with fat accumulation in muscles. Borum et al. (1979) describe carnitine as an essential nutrient for pre-term babies and individuals who are unable to eat a normal diet (e.g. non-ketotic hypoglycemics, kidney dialysis patients) (PMID: 115309  ). In conditions such as kwashiorkor, cirrhosis, and heart muscle disease (cardiomyopathy) as well as in inborn errors of metabolism such as type IV hyperlipidemia and propionic or organic aciduria (acid urine resulting from genetic or other anomalies), carnitine is essential to life and carnitine supplements are valuable. Carnitine therapy may also be useful in a wide variety of clinical conditions. Carnitine supplementation has improved some patients who have angina secondary to coronary artery disease. It may also be worth a trial for patients with any form of hyperlipidemia or muscle weakness.| Carnitine supplements may also be useful in many forms of toxic or metabolic liver disease and in cases of heart muscle disease. Hearts undergoing severe arrhythmia quickly deplete their stores of carnitine. Athletes, particularly in Europe, have used carnitine supplements for improved endurance. Carnitine may improve muscle building by improving fat utilization and may even be useful in treating obesity. Carnitine joins a long list of nutrients which may be of value in treating pregnant women, hypothyroid individuals, and male infertility due to the low motility of sperm. Carnitine deficiency is noted in abnormal liver function, renal dialysis patients, and severe to moderate muscular weakness with associated anorexia (http://www.dcnutrition.com). Carnitine is a biomarker for the consumption of meat.|
HMDB0000182::L-lysine is an essential amino acid. Normal requirements for lysine have been found to be about 8 g per day or 12 mg/kg in adults. Children and infants need more, 44 mg/kg per day for an eleven to-twelve-year old, and 97 mg/kg per day for three-to six-month old. Lysine is highly concentrated in muscle compared to most other amino acids. Lysine is high in foods such as wheat germ, cottage cheese and chicken. Of meat products, wild game and pork have the highest concentration of lysine. Fruits and vegetables contain little lysine, except avocados. Normal lysine metabolism is dependent upon many nutrients including niacin, vitamin B6, riboflavin, vitamin C, glutamic acid and iron. Excess arginine antagonizes lysine. Several inborn errors of lysine metabolism are known, such as cystinuria, hyperdibasic aminoaciduria I, lysinuric protein intolerance, propionic acidemia, and tyrosinemia I. Most are marked by mental retardation with occasional diverse symptoms such as absence of secondary sex characteristics, undescended testes, abnormal facial structure, anemia, obesity, enlarged liver and spleen, and eye muscle imbalance. Lysine also may be a useful adjunct in the treatment of osteoporosis. Although high protein diets result in loss of large amounts of calcium in urine, so does lysine deficiency. Lysine may be an adjunct therapy because it reduces calcium losses in urine. Lysine deficiency also may result in immunodeficiency. Requirements for this amino acid are probably increased by stress.| Lysine toxicity has not occurred with oral doses in humans. Lysine dosages are presently too small and may fail to reach the concentrations necessary to prove potential therapeutic applications. Lysine metabolites, amino caproic acid and carnitine have already shown their therapeutic potential. Thirty grams daily of amino caproic acid has been used as an initial daily dose in treating blood clotting disorders, indicating that the proper doses of lysine, its precursor, have yet to be used in medicine. Low lysine levels have been found in patients with Parkinson's, hypothyroidism, kidney disease, asthma and depression. The exact significance of these levels is unclear, yet lysine therapy can normalize the level and has been associated with improvement of some patients with these conditions. Abnormally elevated hydroxylysines have been found in virtually all chronic degenerative diseases and coumadin therapy. The levels of this stress marker may be improved by high doses of vitamin C. Lysine is particularly useful in therapy for marasmus (wasting) and herpes simplex. It stops the growth of herpes simplex in culture, and has helped to reduce the number and occurrence of cold sores in clinical studies. Dosing has not been adequately studied, but beneficial clinical effects occur in doses ranging from 100 mg to 4 g a day. Higher doses may also be useful, and toxicity has not been reported in doses as high as 8 g per day. Diets high in lysine and low in arginine can be useful in the prevention and treatment of herpes. Some researchers think herpes simplex virus is involved in many other diseases related to cranial nerves such as migraines, Bell's palsy and Meniere's disease. Herpes blister fluid will produce fatal encephalitis in the rabbit (http://www.dcnutrition.com).|
HMDB0013325::2-trans,4-cis-decadienoylcarnitine is classified as a member of the fatty acid esters. Fatty acid esters are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. 2-trans,4-cis-decadienoylcarnitine is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. Within a cell, 2-trans,4-cis-decadienoylcarnitine is primarily located in the extracellular space and near the membrane.|
HMDB0000225::2-Oxoadipic acid is produced from lysine in the cytosol of cells via the saccharopine and the pipecolic acid pathways. Catabolites of hydroxylysine and tryptophan enter these pathways as 2-aminoadipic- -semialdehyde and 2-oxoadipate, respectively. In the matrix of mitochondria, 2-oxoadipate is decarboxylated to glutaryl-CoA by the 2-oxoadipate dehydrogenase complex and then converted to acetyl-CoA. 2-Oxoadipic aciduria is an in-born error of metabolism of lysine, tryptophan, and hydroxylysine, in which abnormal quantities of 2-aminoadipic acid are found in body fluids along with 2-oxoadipic acid. Patients with 2-Oxoadipic acidemias are mentally retarded with hypotonia or seizures. 2-Oxoadipic aciduria can occur in patients with Kearns-Sayre Syndrome, a progressive disorder with onset prior to 20 years of age in which multiple organ systems are affected, including progressive external ophthalmoplegia, retinopathy, and the age of onset, and these are associated classically with abnormalities in cardiac conduction, cerebellar signs, and elevated cerebrospinal fluid protein (PMID: 10655159  , 16183823  , 11083877  ). Oxoadipic acid is found to be associated with alpha-aminoadipic aciduria, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000510::Aminoadipic acid (2-aminoadipate) is a metabolite in the principal biochemical pathway of lysine. It is an intermediate in the metabolism (i.e. breakdown or degradation) of lysine and saccharopine. It antagonizes neuroexcitatory activity modulated by the glutamate receptor N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA). Aminoadipic acid has also been shown to inhibit the production of kynurenic acid, a broad spectrum excitatory amino acid receptor antagonist, in brain tissue slices (PMID: 8566117  ). Recent studies have shown that aminoadipic acid is elevated in prostate biopsy tissues from prostate cancer patients (PMID: 23737455  ). Mutations in DHTKD1 (dehydrogenase E1 and transketolase domain-containing protein 1) have been shown to cause human 2-aminoadipic aciduria and 2-oxoadipic aciduria via impaired decarboxylation of 2-oxoadipate to glutaryl-CoA, which is the last step in the lysine degradation pathway (PMID: 23141293  ). Aging, diabetes, sepsis, and renal failure are known to catalyze the oxidation of lysyl residues to form 2-aminoadipic acid in human skin collagen and potentially other tissues (PMID: 18448817  ). Proteolytic breakdown of these tissues can lead to the release of free 2-aminoadipic acid. Studies in rats indicate that aminoadipic acid (along with the three branched-chain amino acids - leucine, valine, and isoleucine) levels are elevated in the pre-diabetic phase and so aminoadipic acid may serve as a predictive biomarker for the development of diabetes (PMID: 15389298  ).| Long-term hyperglycemia of endothelial cells can also lead to elevated levels of aminoadipate which is thought to be a sign of lysine breakdown through oxidative stress and reactive oxygen species (ROS) (PMID: 21961526  ). 2-Aminoadipate is a potential small-molecule marker of oxidative stress (PMID: 21647514  ). Therefore, depending on the circumstances aminoadipic acid can act as an acidogen, a diabetogen, an atherogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A diabetogen is a compound that can lead to type 2 diabetes. An atherogen is a compound that leads to atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of aminoadipic acid are associated with at least two inborn errors of metabolism including, 2-aminoadipic aciduria and 2-oxoadipic aciduria. Aminoadipic acid is an organic acid and abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart abnormalities, kidney abnormalities, liver damage, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of the untreated IEMs mentioned above.| Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures. As a diabetogen, serum aminoadipic levels appear to regulate glucose homeostasis and have been highly predictive of individuals who later develop diabetes (PMID: 24091325  ). In particular, aminoadipic acid lowers fasting plasma glucose levels and enhances insulin secretion from human islets. As an atherogen, aminoadipic acid has been found to be produced at high levels via protein lysine oxidation in atherosclerotic plaques (PMID: 28069522  ).|
HMDB0000321::2-Hydroxyadipic acid is a hydroxy-dicarboxylic acid formed by the reduction of 2-ketoadipic acid. A deficiency of 2-ketoadipic dehydrogenase causes 2-ketoadipic acidemia or 2-oxoadipic acidemia (OMIM: 245130  ), a genetic disorder characterized by accumulation and excretion of 2-hydroxyadipic acid (with 2-ketoadipic and 2-aminoadipic) (OMMBID - The Online Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, CH.95). When present in sufficiently high levels, 2-hydroxyadipic acid can act as an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of 2-hydroxyadipic acid are associated with at least three inborn errors of metabolism including  2-oxoadipic acidemia, 2-aminoadipic aciduria, and 2-oxoadipic aciduria. 2-Hydroxyadipic acid is an organic acid. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart abnormalities, kidney abnormalities, liver damage, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of the untreated IEMs mentioned above. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures.|
HMDB0000243::Pyruvic acid is an intermediate compound in the metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. In thiamine deficiency, its oxidation is retarded and it accumulates in the tissues, especially in nervous structures (From Stedman, 26th ed.). Biological Source: Intermediate in primary metabolism including fermentation processes. Present in muscle in redox equilibrium with Lactic acid. A common constituent, as a chiral cyclic acetal linked to saccharide residues, of bacterial polysaccharides. Isolated from cane sugar fermentation broth and peppermint. Constituent of Bauhinia purpurea, Cicer arietinum (chickpea), Delonix regia, Pisum sativum (pea) and Trigonella caerulea (sweet trefoil) Use/Importance: Reagent for regeneration of carbonyl compdounds from semicarbazones, phenylhydrazones and oximes. Flavoring ingredient (Dictionary of Organic Compounds). Pyruvic acid is found to be associated with Fumarase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000094::Citric acid (citrate) is a weak acid that is formed in the tricarboxylic acid cycle or that may be introduced with diet. The evaluation of plasma citric acid is scarcely used in the diagnosis of human diseases. On the contrary urinary citrate excretion is a common tool in the differential diagnosis of kidney stones, renal tubular acidosis and it plays also a role in bone diseases. The importance of hypocitraturia should be considered with regard to bone mass, urine crystallization and urolithiasis. (PMID 12957820  ) The secretory epithelial cells of the prostate gland of humans and other animals posses a unique citrate-related metabolic pathway regulated by testosterone and prolactin. This specialized hormone-regulated metabolic activity is responsible for the major prostate function of the production and secretion of extraordinarily high levels of citrate. The key regulatory enzymes directly associated with citrate production in the prostate cells are mitochondrial aspartate aminotransferase, pyruvate dehydrogenase, and mitochondrial aconitase. testosterone and prolactin are involved in the regulation of the corresponding genes associated with these enzymes. The regulatory regions of these genes contain the necessary response elements that confer the ability of both hormones to control gene transcription. Protein kinase C (PKC) is the signaling pathway for the prolactin regulation of the metabolic genes in prostate cells. testosterone and prolactin regulation of these metabolic genes (which are constitutively expressed in all mammalian cells is specific for these citrate-producing cells (PMID 12198595  ).| Citric acid is found in citrus fruits, most concentrated in lemons and limes, where it can comprise as much as 8% of the dry weight of the fruit. Citric acid is a natural preservative and is also used to add an acidic (sour) taste to foods and soft drinks. The salts of citric acid (citrates) can be used as anticoagulants due to their calcium chelating ability. Intolerance to citric acid in the diet is known to exist. Little information is available as the condition appears to be rare, but like other types of food intolerance it is often described as a "pseudo-allergic" reaction. Moreover, citric acid is found to be associated with maple syrup urine disease, primary hypomagnesemia, propionic acidemia, and tyrosinemia I, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000208::Oxoglutaric acid, also known as alpha-ketoglutarate, alpha-ketoglutaric acid, AKG, or 2-oxoglutaric acid, is classified as a gamma-keto acid or a gamma-keto acid derivative. gamma-Keto acids are organic compounds containing an aldehyde substituted with a keto group on the C4 carbon atom. alpha-Ketoglutarate is considered to be soluble (in water) and acidic. alpha-Ketoglutarate is a key molecule in the TCA cycle, playing a fundamental role in determining the overall rate of this important metabolic process (PMID: 26759695  ). In the TCA cycle, AKG is decarboxylated to succinyl-CoA and carbon dioxide by AKG dehydrogenase, which functions as a key control point of the TCA cycle. Additionally, AKG can be generated from isocitrate by oxidative decarboxylation catalyzed by the enzyme known as isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH). In addition to these routes of production, AKG can be produced from glutamate by oxidative deamination via glutamate dehydrogenase, and as a product of pyridoxal phosphate-dependent transamination reactions (mediated by branched-chain amino acid transaminases) in which glutamate is a common amino donor. AKG is a nitrogen scavenger and a source of glutamate and glutamine that stimulates protein synthesis and inhibits protein degradation in muscles. In particular, AKG can decrease protein catabolism and increase protein synthesis to enhance bone tissue formation in skeletal muscles (PMID: 26759695  ). Interestingly, enteric feeding of AKG supplements can significantly increase circulating plasma levels of hormones such as insulin, growth hormone, and insulin-like growth factor-1 (PMID: 26759695  ).| It has recently been shown that AKG (Oxoglutaric acid) can extend the lifespan of adult C. elegans by inhibiting ATP synthase and TOR (PMID: 24828042  ). In combination with molecular oxygen, alpha-ketoglutarate is required for the hydroxylation of proline to hydroxyproline in the production of type I collagen. A recent study has shown that alpha-ketoglutarate promotes TH1 differentiation along with the depletion of glutamine thereby favouring Treg (regulatory T-cell) differentiation (PMID: 26420908  ). alpha-Ketoglutarate has been found to be associated with fumarase deficiency, 2-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex deficiency, and D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria, which are all inborn errors of metabolism (PMID: 8338207  ).|
HMDB0000060::Acetoacetic acid (AcAc) is a weak organic acid that can be produced in the human liver under certain conditions of poor metabolism leading to excessive fatty acid breakdown (diabetes mellitus leading to diabetic ketoacidosis). It is then partially converted into acetone by decarboxylation and excreted either in urine or through respiration. Persistent mild hyperketonemia is a common finding in newborns. Ketone bodies serve as an indispensable source of energy for extrahepatic tissues, especially the brain and lung of developing rats. Another important function of ketone bodies is to provide acetoacetyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA for synthesis of cholesterol, fatty acids, and complex lipids. During the early postnatal period, acetoacetate and beta-hydroxybutyrate are preferred over glucose as substrates for synthesis of phospholipids and sphingolipids in accord with requirements for brain growth and myelination. Thus, during the first two weeks of postnatal development, when the accumulation of cholesterol and phospholipids accelerates, the proportion of ketone bodies incorporated into these lipids increases. On the other hand, an increased proportion of ketone bodies are utilized for cerebroside synthesis during the period of active myelination. In the lung, AcAc serves better than glucose as a precursor for the synthesis of lung phospholipids. The synthesized lipids, particularly dipalmityl phosphatidylcholine, are incorporated into surfactant, and thus have a potential role in supplying adequate surfactant lipids to maintain lung function during the early days of life (PMID: 3884391  ). The acid is also present in the metabolism of those undergoing starvation or prolonged physical exertion as part of gluconeogenesis. When ketone bodies are measured by way of urine concentration, acetoacetic acid, along with beta-hydroxybutyric acid or acetone, is what is detected.|
HMDB0000357::3-Hydroxybutyric acid (or beta-hydroxybutyrate) is a ketone body. Like the other ketone bodies (acetoacetate and acetone), levels of 3-hydroxybutyrate in blood and urine are raised in ketosis. In humans, 3-hydroxybutyrate is synthesized in the liver from acetyl-CoA and can be used as an energy source by the brain when blood glucose is low. Blood levels of 3-hydroxybutyric acid levels may be monitored in diabetic patients to look for diabetic ketoacidosis. Persistent mild hyperketonemia is a common finding in newborns. Ketone bodies serve as an indispensable source of energy for extrahepatic tissues, especially the brain and lung of developing mammals. Another important function of ketone bodies is to provide acetoacetyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA for the synthesis of cholesterol, fatty acids, and complex lipids. During the early postnatal period, acetoacetate (AcAc) and beta-hydroxybutyrate are preferred over glucose as substrates for synthesis of phospholipids and sphingolipids in accord with requirements for brain growth and myelination. Thus, during the first 2 weeks of postnatal development, when the accumulation of cholesterol and phospholipids accelerates, the proportion of ketone bodies incorporated into these lipids increases. On the other hand, an increased proportion of ketone bodies is utilized for cerebroside synthesis during the period of active myelination. In the lung, AcAc serves better than glucose as a precursor for the synthesis of lung phospholipids. The synthesized lipids, particularly dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine, are incorporated into surfactant, and thus have a potential role in supplying adequate surfactant lipids to maintain lung function during the early days of life (PMID: 3884391  ). 3-Hydroxybutyric acid is found to be associated with fumarase deficiency and medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000595::Bicarbonate, or hydrogen carbonate, is a simple single carbon molecule that plays surprisingly important roles in diverse biological processes. Among these are photosynthesis, the Krebs cycle, whole-body and cellular pH regulation, and volume regulation. Since bicarbonate is charged it is not permeable to lipid bilayers. Mammalian membranes thus contain bicarbonate transport proteins to facilitate the specific transmembrane movement of HCO3(-). Bicarbonate ion is an anion that consists of one central carbon atom surrounded by three oxygen atoms in a trigonal planar arrangement, with a hydrogen atom attached to one of the oxygens. The bicarbonate ion carries a negative one formal charge and is the conjugate base of carbonic acid, H2CO3.| The carbonate radical is an elusive and strong one-electron oxidant. Bicarbonate in equilibrium with carbon dioxide constitutes the main physiological buffer. The bicarbonate-carbon dioxide pair stimulates the oxidation, peroxidation and nitration of several biological targets. The demonstration that the carbonate radical existed as an independent species in aqueous solutions at physiological pH and temperature renewed the interest in the pathophysiological roles of this radical and related species. The carbonate radical has been proposed to be a key mediator of the oxidative damage resulting from peroxynitrite production, xanthine oxidase turnover and superoxide dismutase1 peroxidase activity. The carbonate radical has also been proposed to be responsible for the stimulatory effects of the bicarbonate-carbon dioxide pair on oxidations mediated by hydrogen peroxide/transition metal ions. The ultimate precursor of the carbonate radical anion being bicarbonate, carbon dioxide, peroxymonocarbonate or complexes of transition metal ions with bicarbonate-derived species remains a matter of debate. The carbonate radical mediates some of the pathogenic effects of peroxynitrite. The carbonate radical as the oxidant produced from superoxide dismutase (EC 1.15.1.1, SOD1) peroxidase activity. Peroxymonocarbonate is a biological oxidant, whose existence is in equilibrium with hydrogen peroxide and bicarbonate (PMID: 17505962  , 17215880  ). Hydrogen carbonate is found to be associated with hawkinsinuria, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000134::Fumaric acid is a dicarboxylic acid. It is a precursor to L-malate in the Krebs tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. It is formed by the oxidation of succinic acid by succinate dehydrogenase. Fumarate is converted by the enzyme fumarase to malate. Fumaric acid has recently been identified as an oncometabolite or an endogenous, cancer causing metabolite. High levels of this organic acid can be found in tumors or biofluids surrounding tumors. Its oncogenic action appears to due to its ability to inhibit prolyl hydroxylase-containing enzymes. In many tumours, oxygen availability becomes limited (hypoxia) very quickly due to rapid cell proliferation and limited blood vessel growth. The major regulator of the response to hypoxia is the HIF transcription factor (HIF-alpha). Under normal oxygen levels, protein levels of HIF-alpha are very low due to constant degradation, mediated by a series of post-translational modification events catalyzed by the prolyl hydroxylase domain-containing enzymes PHD1, 2 and 3, (also known as EglN2, 1 and 3) that hydroxylate HIF-alpha and lead to its degradation. All three of the PHD enzymes are inhibited by fumarate. Fumaric acid is found to be associated with fumarase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000156::Malic acid is a tart-tasting organic dicarboxylic acid that plays a role in many sour or tart foods. Apples contain malic acid, which contributes to the sourness of a green apple. Malic acid can make a wine taste tart, although the amount decreases with increasing fruit ripeness. (wikipedia). In its ionized form malic acid is called malate. Malate is an intermediate of the TCA cycle along with fumarate. It can also be formed from pyruvate as one of the anaplerotic reactions. In humans, malic acid is both derived from food sources and synthesized in the body through the citric acid cycle or Krebs cycle which takes place in the mitochondria. Malate's importance to the production of energy in the body during both aerobic and anaerobic conditions is well established. Under aerobic conditions, the oxidation of malate to oxaloacetate provides reducing equivalents to the mitochondria through the malate-aspartate redox shuttle. During anaerobic conditions, where a buildup of excess of reducing equivalents inhibits glycolysis, malic acid's simultaneous reduction to succinate and oxidation to oxaloacetate is capable of removing the accumulating reducing equivalents. This allows malic acid to reverse hypoxia's inhibition of glycolysis and energy production. In studies on rats it has been found that only tissue malate is depleted following exhaustive physical activity. Other key metabolites from the citric acid cycle needed for energy production were found to be unchanged. Because of this, a deficiency of malic acid has been hypothesized to be a major cause of physical exhaustion. Notably, the administration of malic acid to rats has been shown to elevate mitochondrial malate and increase mitochondrial respiration and energy production.|
HMDB0000254::Succinic acid is a dicarboxylic acid. The anion, succinate, is a component of the citric acid or TCA cycle and is capable of donating electrons to the electron transfer chain. Succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) plays an important role in mitochondrial function, being both part of the respiratory chain and the Krebs cycle. SDH with a covalently attached FAD prosthetic group, is able to bind several different enzyme substrates (succinate and fumarate) and physiological regulators (oxaloacetate and ATP). Oxidizing succinate links SDH to the fast-cycling Krebs cycle portion where it participates in the breakdown of acetyl-CoA throughout the entire Krebs cycle. Succinate can readily be imported into the mitochondrial matrix by the n-butylmalonate- (or phenylsuccinate-) sensitive dicarboxylate carrier in exchange with inorganic phosphate or another organic acid, e. g. malate (PMID 16143825  ). Mutations in the four genes encoding the subunits of the mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase are associated with a wide spectrum of clinical presentations, i.e.: Huntington's disease (PMID 11803021   ). Moreover, succinic acid is found to be associated with D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria, which is an inborn error of metabolism.| Succinic acid has recently been identified as an oncometabolite or an endogenous, cancer causing metabolite. High levels of this organic acid can be found in tumors or biofluids surrounding tumors. Its oncogenic action appears to due to its ability to inhibit prolyl hydroxylase-containing enzymes. In many tumours, oxygen availability becomes limited (hypoxia) very quickly due to rapid cell proliferation and limited blood vessel growth. The major regulator of the response to hypoxia is the HIF transcription factor (HIF-alpha). Under normal oxygen levels, protein levels of HIF-alpha are very low due to constant degradation, mediated by a series of post-translational modification events catalyzed by the prolyl hydroxylase domain-containing enzymes PHD1, 2 and 3, (also known as EglN2, 1 and 3) that hydroxylate HIF-alpha and lead to its degradation. All three of the PHD enzymes are inhibited by succinate. Succinic acid is found to be associated with D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000122::Glucose is a monosaccharide containing six carbon atoms and an aldehyde group and is therefore referred to as an aldohexose. The glucose molecule can exist in an open-chain (acyclic) and ring (cyclic) form, the latter being the result of an intramolecular reaction between the aldehyde C atom and the C-5 hydroxyl group to form an intramolecular hemiacetal. In water solution both forms are in equilibrium and at pH 7 the cyclic one is the predominant. Glucose is a primary source of energy for living organisms. It is naturally occurring and is found in fruits and other parts of plants in its free state. In animals glucose arises from the breakdown of glycogen in a process known as glycogenolysis. Glucose is synthesized in the liver and kidneys from non-carbohydrate intermediates, such as pyruvate and glycerol, by a process known as gluconeogenesis. D-Glucose is found to be associated with 3-methyl-crotonyl-glycinuria, growth hormone deficiency, and primary hypomagnesemia, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000354::3-Hydroxy-2-methyl-butanoic acid (HMBA) is a normal urinary metabolite involved in the isoleucine catabolism, as well as presumably beta-oxidation of fatty acids and ketogenesis, excreted in abnormally high amounts in beta-ketothiolase deficiency, which is a genetic disorder. Differences in the enantiomeric ratio of HMBA may originate from the enantioselectivity of different enzyme systems (PMID 10755375  ).|
HMDB0000959::Tiglylglycine is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction: acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycine. Tiglylglycine is an intermediate product of the catabolism of isoleucine. An elevated level of tiglylglycine is identified in urine of patients with beta-ketothiolase deficiency or with disorders of propionate metabolism (PMID 7923765  ). Tiglyglycine is a biomarker for the consumption of cheese.|
HMDB0000562::Creatinine, or creatine anhydride, is a breakdown product of creatine phosphate in muscle. The loss of a water molecule from creatine results in the formation of creatinine. Creatinine is transferred to the kidneys by blood plasma, whereupon it is eliminated from the body by glomerular filtration and partial tubular excretion. Creatinine is usually produced at a fairly constant rate by the body. Measuring serum creatinine is a simple test and it is the most commonly used indicator of renal function. A rise in blood creatinine levels is observed only with marked damage to functioning nephrons. Therefore, this test is not suitable for detecting early kidney disease. The typical reference range for women is considered about 45-90 µmol/L; for men 60-110 µmol/L. Creatine and creatinine are metabolized in the kidneys, muscle, liver, and pancreas.|
HMDB0000586::Potassium is an essential electrolyte. Potassium balance is crucial for regulating the excitability of nerves and muscles and so critical for regulating contractility of cardiac muscle. Although the most important changes seen in the presence of deranged potassium are cardiac, smooth muscle is also affected with increasing muscle weakness, a feature of both hyperkalaemia and hypokalaemia. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. Potassium (K+) is a positively charged electrolyte, cation, which is present throughout the body in both intracellular and extracellular fluids. The majority of body potassium, >90%, are intracellular. It moves freely from intracellular fluid (ICF) to extracellular fluid (ECF) and vice versa when adenosine triphosphate increases the permeability of the cell membrane. It is mainly replaced inside or outside the cells by another cation, sodium (Na+).| The movement of potassium into or out of the cells is linked to certain body hormones and also to certain physiological states. Standard laboratory tests measure ECF potassium. Potassium enters the body rapidly during food ingestion. Insulin is produced when a meal is eaten; this causes the temporary movement of potassium from ECF to ICF. Over the ensuing hours, the kidneys excrete the ingested potassium and homeostasis is returned. In the critically ill patient, suffering from hyperkalaemia, this mechanism can be manipulated beneficially by administering high concentration (50%) intravenous glucose. Insulin can be added to the glucose, but glucose alone will stimulate insulin production and cause movement of potassium from ECF to ICF. The stimulation of alpha receptors causes increased movement of potassium from ICF to ECF. A noradrenaline infusion can elevate serum potassium levels. An adrenaline infusion, or elevated adrenaline levels, can lower serum potassium levels. Metabolic acidosis causes a rise in extracellular potassium levels. In this situation, excess of hydrogen ions (H+) are exchanged for intracellular potassium ions, probably as a result of the cellular response to a falling blood pH. Metabolic alkalosis causes the opposite effect, with potassium moving into the cells. (PMID: 17883675  ).|
HMDB0000588::Sodium ions are necessary for regulation of blood and body fluids, transmission of nerve impulses, heart activity, and certain metabolic functions. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. Sodium is needed by animals, which maintain high concentrations in their blood and extracellular fluids, but the ion is not needed by plants. The human requirement for sodium in the diet is less than 500 mg per day, which is typically less than a tenth as much as many diets "seasoned to taste." Most people consume far more sodium than is physiologically needed. For certain people with salt-sensitive blood pressure, this extra intake may cause a negative effect on health.|
HMDB0000077::Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is a natural steroid hormone produced from cholesterol by the adrenal glands. DHEA is also produced in the gonads, adipose tissue, and the brain. DHEA is structurally similar to and is a precursor of, androstenedione, testosterone, estradiol, estrone, and estrogen. It is the most abundant hormone in the human body. Most of DHEA is sulfated (dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate or DHEA-S) before secretion. DHEA-S is the sulfated version of DHEA; this conversion is reversibly catalyzed by sulfotransferase (SULT2A1) primarily in the adrenals, the liver, and small intestines. In blood, most DHEA is found as DHEA-S with levels that are about 300 times higher than free DHEA. Blood measurements of DHEA-S/DHEA are useful to detect excess adrenal activity as seen in adrenal cancer or hyperplasia, including certain forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Women with polycystic ovary syndrome tend to have normal or mildly elevated levels of DHEA-S.|
HMDB0000051::Ammonia is a colourless alkaline gas and is one of the most abundant nitrogen-containing compounds in the atmosphere. It is an irritant with a characteristic pungent odor that is widely used in industry. Inasmuch as ammonia is highly soluble in water and, upon inhalation, is deposited in the upper airways, occupational exposures to ammonia have commonly been associated with sinusitis, upper airway irritation, and eye irritation. Acute exposures to high levels of ammonia have also been associated with diseases of the lower airways and interstitial lung. Small amounts of ammonia are naturally formed in nearly all tissues and organs of the vertebrate organism. Ammonia is both a neurotoxin and a metabotoxin. In fact, it is the most common endogenous neurotoxin. A neurotoxin is a compound that causes damage to neural tissue and neural cells. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels.| Ammonia is recognized to be central in the pathogenesis of a brain condition known as hepatic encephalopathy, which arises from various liver diseases and leads to a build up ammonia in the blood (hyperammonemia). More than 40% of people with cirrhosis develop hepatic encephalopathy. Part of the neurotoxicity of ammonia arises from the fact that it easily crosses the blood-brain barrier and is absorbed and metabolized by the astrocytes, a population of cells in the brain that constitutes 30% of the cerebral cortex. Astrocytes use ammonia when synthesizing glutamine from glutamate. The increased levels of glutamine lead to an increase in osmotic pressure in the astrocytes, which become swollen. There is increased activity of the inhibitory gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) system, and the energy supply to other brain cells is decreased. This can be thought of as an example of brain edema. The source of the ammonia leading to hepatic encaphlopahy is not entirely clear.| The gut produces ammonia, which is metabolized in the liver, and almost all organ systems are involved in ammonia metabolism. Colonic bacteria produce ammonia by splitting urea and other amino acids, however this does not fully explain hyperammonemia and hepatic encephalopathy. The alternative explanation is that hyperammonemia is the result of intestinal breakdown of amino acids, especially glutamine. The intestines have significant glutaminase activity, predominantly located in the enterocytes. On the other hand, intestinal tissues only have a little glutamine synthetase activity, making it a major glutamine-consuming organ. In addition to the intestine, the kidney is an important source of blood ammonia in patients with liver disease. Ammonia is also taken up by the muscle and brain in hepatic coma, and there is confirmation that ammonia is metabolized in muscle. Excessive formation of ammonia in the brains of Alzheimer's disease patients has also been demonstrated, and it has been shown that some Alzheimer's disease patients exhibit elevated blood ammonia concentrations.| Ammonia is the most important natural modulator of lysosomal protein processing. Indeed, there is strong evidence for the involvement of aberrant lysosomal processing of beta-amyloid precursor protein (beta-APP) in the formation of amyloid deposits. Inflammatory processes and activation of microglia are widely believed to be implicated in the pathology of Alzheimer's disease. Ammonia is able to affect the characteristic functions of microglia, such as endocytosis, and cytokine production. Based on these facts, an ammonia-based hypothesis for Alzheimer's disease has been suggested (PMID: 17006913  , 16167195  , 15377862  , 15369278  ). Chronically high levels of ammonia in the blood are associated with nearly twenty different inborn errors of metabolism including: 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency, 3-methyl-crotonylglycinuria, argininemia, argininosuccinic aciduria, beta-ketothiolase deficiency, biotinidase deficiency, carbamoyl phosphate synthetase deficiency, carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency, citrullinemia type I, hyperinsulinism-hyperammonemia syndrome, hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria syndrome, isovaleric aciduria, lysinuric protein intolerance, malonic aciduria, methylmalonic aciduria, methylmalonic aciduria due to cobalamin-related disorders, propionic acidemia, pyruvate carboxylase deficiency, and short chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SCAD deficiency). Many of these inborn errors of metabolism are associated with urea cycle disorders or impairment to amino acid metabolism. High levels of ammonia in the blood (hyperammonemia) lead to the activation of NMDA receptors in the brain. This results in the depletion of brain ATP, which in turn leads to release of glutamate. Ammonia also leads to the impairment of mitochondrial function and calcium homeostasis, thereby decreasing ATP synthesis. Excess ammonia also increases the formation of nitric oxide (NO), which in turn reduces the activity of glutamine synthetase, and thereby decreases the elimination of ammonia in the brain (PMID: 12020609  ).| As a neurotoxin, ammonia predominantly affects astrocytes. Disturbed mitochondrial function and oxidative stress, factors implicated in the induction of the mitochondrial permeability transition, appear to be involved in the mechanism of ammonia neurotoxicity. Ammonia can also affect the glutamatergic and GABAergic neuronal systems, the two prevailing neuronal systems of the cortical structures. All of these effects can lead to irreversible brain damage, coma, and/or death. Infants with urea cycle disorders and hyperammonia initially exhibit vomiting and increasing lethargy. If untreated, seizures, hypotonia (poor muscle tone, floppiness), respiratory distress (respiratory alkalosis), and coma can occur. Adults with urea cycle disorders and hyperammonia will exhibit episodes of disorientation, confusion, slurred speech, unusual and extreme combativeness or agitation, stroke-like symptoms, lethargy, and delirium. Ammonia also has toxic effects when an individual is exposed to ammonia solutions. Acute exposure to high levels of ammonia in air may be irritating to skin, eyes, throat, and lungs and cause coughing and burns. Lung damage and death may occur after exposure to very high concentrations of ammonia. Swallowing concentrated solutions of ammonia can cause burns in the mouth, throat, and stomach. Splashing ammonia into eyes can cause burns and even blindness.|
HMDB0061189::3-Hydroxyisovalerylcarnitine is structual derivative of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid and carnitine. Due to its increased concentration in blood, 3-hydroxyisovalerylcarnitine (C5OH-I) is an important indicator for the diagnosis of organic acidemias in newborns (PMID: 18088573  ). Analysis of acylcarnitines by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) has recently been used to screen newborns for organic acidemias and fatty acid oxidation defects (PMID: 7494654  , 9216448  , 11427446  , 12127323  , 14578311  ). These diseases cause the accumulation of acyl-CoA, which is esterified to acylcarnitine by carnitine acyltransferase. Acylcarnitine is then eliminated in the urine, thus acylcarnitine concentration serves as an excellent indicator for these diseases (PMID: 6361812  ). 3-Hydroxyisovalerylcarnitine (C5OH-I) is an indicator for diagnoses of multiple carboxylase deficiency (MCD), 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency (PMID: 18088573  ), which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000063::Cortisol is the main glucocorticoid secreted by the adrenal cortex and it is involved in the stress response. Its synthetic counterpart hydrocortisone is used, either as an injection or topically, in the treatment of inflammation, allergy, collagen diseases, asthma, adrenocortical deficiency, shock, and some neoplastic conditions. Hydrocortisone is synthesized from pregnenolone and is used as an immunosuppressive drug given by injection in the treatment of severe allergic reactions such as anaphylaxis and angioedema, in place of prednisolone in patients who need steroid treatment but cannot take oral medication, and peri-operatively in patients on long-term steroid treatment to prevent an Addisonian crisis. Cortisol increases blood pressure, blood sugar levels, may cause infertility in women, and suppresses the immune system.| The amount of cortisol present in the serum undergoes diurnal variation, with the highest levels present in the early morning and lower levels in the evening, several hours after the onset of sleep. Cortisol is found to be associated with ACTH deficiency and glucocorticoid deficiency, which are inborn errors of metabolism. Cortisol binds to the cytosolic glucocorticoid receptor. After binding the receptor, the newly formed receptor-ligand complex translocates itself into the cell nucleus where it binds to many glucocorticoid response elements (GRE) in the promoter region of the target genes. The DNA-bound receptor then interacts with basic transcription factors, causing the increase in expression of specific target genes.| The anti-inflammatory actions of corticosteroids are thought to involve lipocortins, phospholipase A2 inhibitory proteins which, through inhibition arachidonic acid, control the biosynthesis of prostaglandins and leukotrienes. Specifically, glucocorticoids induce lipocortin-1 (annexin-1) synthesis, which then binds to cell membranes and prevents phospholipase A2 from coming into contact with its substrate arachidonic acid. This leads to diminished eicosanoid production. The cyclooxygenase (both COX-1 and COX-2) expression is also suppressed, potentiating the effect. In other words, the two main products of inflammation, prostaglandins and leukotrienes, are inhibited by the action of glucocorticoids. Glucocorticoids also stimulate the escape of lipocortin-1 into the extracellular space, where it binds to the leukocyte membrane receptors and inhibits various inflammatory events: epithelial adhesion, emigration, chemotaxis, phagocytosis, respiratory burst, and the release of various inflammatory mediators (lysosomal enzymes, cytokines, tissue plasminogen activator, chemokines, etc.) from neutrophils, macrophages, and mastocytes. Additionally, the immune system is suppressed by corticosteroids due to a decrease in the function of the lymphatic system, a reduction in immunoglobulin and complement concentrations, the precipitation of lymphocytopenia, and interference with antigen-antibody binding.|
HMDB0000552::3-Methylglutarylcarnitine is a diagnostic metabolite of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A lyase deficiency. It is also identified in the urine of patients with Reye-like syndrome (PMID 3958190  , 10927963  ).|
HMDB0000754::3-Hydroxyisovaleric acid is a normal human metabolite excreted in the urine. It is a byproduct of the leucine degradation pathway. Production of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid begins with the conversion of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA into 3-methylglutaconyl-CoA in the mitochondria by the biotin-dependent enzyme methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase. Biotin deficiencies, certain lifestyle habits (smoking), or specific genetic conditions can reduce methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase activity. This reduction can lead to a buildup of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA, which is converted into 3-hydroxyisovaleryl-CoA by the enzyme enoyl-CoA hydratase. Increased concentrations of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA and 3-hydroxyisovaleryl-CoA can lead to a disruption of the esterified CoA:free CoA ratio, and ultimately to mitochondrial toxicity. Detoxification of these metabolic end products occur via the transfer of the 3-hydroxyisovaleryl moiety to carnitine forming 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid-carnitine or 3HIA-carnitine, which is then transferred across the inner mitochondrial membrane where 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid is released as the free acid (PMID: 21918059  ). 3-Hydroxyisovaleric acid has been found to be elevated in smokers and in subjects undergoing long-term anticonvulsant therapy with carbamazepine and/or phenytoin. These levels are elevated due to impairment of renal reclamation of biotin. Levels may also be increased from prolonged consumption of raw egg-whites (PMID: 16895887  , 9523856  , 15447901  , 9176832  ) (OMIM: 210210  , 253270  , 600529  , 253260  , 246450  , 210200  , 238331  ). When present in sufficiently high levels, 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid can act as an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels.| Chronically high levels of 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid are associated with at least a dozen inborn errors of metabolism, including 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency, 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type I, biotinidase deficiency and isovaleric aciduria, dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase deficiency, 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase 1 deficiency, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency, late-onset multiple carboxylase deficiency, holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency, and 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase 2 deficiency.| 3-Hydroxyisovaleric acid is an organic acid. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart, liver, and kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of the untreated IEMs mentioned above. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures.|
HMDB0000459::3-Methylcrotonylglycine is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction: acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycine. 3-Methylcrotonylglycine is a normal amino acid metabolite found in urine. Increased levels of this metabolite are found in patients suffering from leucine catabolic disorders, such as 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency. 3-Methylcrotonylglycine is often considered to be a diagnostic marker of organic acidemias (PMID 11170888  ). Moreover, 3-methylcrotonylglycine is found to be associated with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency and propionic acidemia, which are also inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000522::3-Methylglutaconic acid is an intermediate (as the CoA thioester) in the leucine degradative pathway as well as the mevalonate shunt, a pathway that links isoprenoid metabolism with mitochondrial acetyl-CoA metabolism (PMID: 7603789  ). 3-methylglutaconyl-CoA hydratase is involved in the metabolism process of 3-methylglutaconic acid. When present in sufficiently high levels, 3-methylglutaconic acid can act as an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels.| Chronically high levels of 3-methylglutaconic acid are associated with at least five inborn errors of metabolism including 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency, 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type I, 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type III, 3-methylglutaconic aciduria type IV, and guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency (GAMT deficiency). 3-Methylglutaconic acid is an organic acid. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart, liver, and kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of the untreated IEMs mentioned above. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures.|
HMDB0000752::Methylglutaric acid is a leucine metabolite. A large amount of methylglutaric acid is identified in urine of patients with deficiency of 3-methylglutaconyl coenzyme A hydratase (PMID 6181239  ). Methylglutaric acid is also found to be associated with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency, another inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000448::Adipic acid is an important inudstrial dicarboxylic acid with about 2.5 billion kilograms produced per year. It is used mainly in the production of nylon. It occurs relatively rarely in nature. It has a tart taste and is also used as an additive and gelling agent in jello or gelatins. It is also used in some calcium carbonate antacids to make them tart. Adipic acid has also been incorporated into controlled-release formulation matrix tablets to obtain pH-independent release for both weakly basic and weakly acidic drugs. Adipic acid in the urine and in the blood is typically exogenous in origin and is a good biomarker of jello consumption. In fact, a condition known as adipic aciduria is actually an artifact of jello consumption (PMID: 1779643  ). However, certain disorders (such as diabetes and glutaric aciduria type I.) can lead to elevated levels of adipic acid snd other dicarboxcylic acids (such as suberic acid) in urine (PMID: 17520433  ; PMID: 6778884  ). Moreover, adipic acid is also found to be associated with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency, carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency, malonyl-Coa decarboxylase deficiency, and medium Chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000509::Senecioic acid appears in the urine of patients with 3-Methylcrotonic aciduria, which is a disorder characterised by urine that contains increased amounts of 3-methylcrotonic acid (Senecioic acid). It is caused by defects in a biotin-dependent reaction that forms 3-methylglutaconic acid. (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0170858::3-methyl-3-butenoic acid is an isomer of senecioic acid (3-methylcrotonic acid) and has been found in the urine of patients with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency (an uncommon inherited disorder characterized by an inability to properly metabolize leucine) (PMID: 6157502  ).|
HMDB0000355::3-Hydroxymethylglutaric acid is an "off-product" intermediate in the leucine degradation process. It is produced by defective or inefficient versions of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase, an enzyme that normally catalyzes the conversion of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA to acetyl-CoA and acetoacetate. If this enzyme is defective, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA will accumulate in the mitochondria. Increased concentrations of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA can lead to a disruption of the esterified CoA:free CoA ratio and ultimately to mitochondrial toxicity. Detoxification of these CoA end products occurs via the transfer of the 3-hydroxymethylglutaryl moiety to carnitine, forming 3-hydroxymethylglutaric-carnitine, which is then transferred across the inner mitochondrial membrane where 3-hydroxymethylglutaric acid is released as the free acid. 3-Hydroxymethylglutaric acid has been found to accumulate in the urine of patients affected by 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaric aciduria, a rare inborn error of metabolism (OMIM: 246450  ). 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaric aciduria is caused by significantly reduced enzyme activity of the intramitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase (EC 4.1.3.4), the enzyme that catalyzes the final step of leucine degradation.  This enzyme also plays a key role in ketone body formation. The profile of urinary organic acids for individuals with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric aciduria is different from that of the other identified defects of leucine degradation, such as maple syrup urine disease (OMIM: 248600  ), isovaleric acidemia (OMIM: 243500  ), and methylcrotonylglycinemia (OMIM: 210200  ). The urinary organic acid profile of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric aciduria includes elevated concentrations of 3-hydroxy-3-isovaleric, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric, 3-methylglutaconic, and 3-methylglutaric acids (PMID: 10916782  , 9658458  , 3063529  ).| Clinical manifestations of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric aciduria include hepatomegaly, lethargy, coma, and apnea. Biochemically, there is a characteristic absence of ketosis with hypoglycemia, acidosis, hypertransaminasemia, and variable hyperammonemia. Therefore, when present in sufficiently high concentrations, 3-hydroxymethylglutaric acid can act as an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. As noted above, chronically high levels of 3-hydroxymethylglutaric acid are associated with the inborn error of metabolism 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency. 3-Hydroxymethylglutaric acid is an organic acid. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart, liver, and kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of the untreated IEMs mentioned above. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures.|
HMDB0000661::Glutaric acid is a simple five-carbon linear dicarboxylic acid. Glutaric acid is naturally produced in the body during the metabolism of some amino acids, including lysine and tryptophan. Glutaric acid may cause irritation to the skin and eyes. When present in sufficiently high levels, glutaric acid can act as an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of glutaric acid are associated with at least three inborn errors of metabolism, including glutaric aciduria type I, malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency, and glutaric aciduria type III.| Glutaric aciduria type I (glutaric acidemia type I, glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, GA1, or GAT1) is an inherited disorder in which the body is unable to completely break down the amino acids lysine, hydroxylysine, and tryptophan due to a deficiency of mitochondrial glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase (EC 1.3.99.7, GCDH). Excessive levels of their intermediate breakdown products (e.g. glutaric acid, glutaryl-CoA, 3-hydroxyglutaric acid, glutaconic acid) can accumulate and cause damage to the brain (and also other organs). Babies with glutaric acidemia type I are often born with unusually large heads (macrocephaly). Macrocephaly is amongst the earliest signs of GA1. GA1 also causes secondary carnitine deficiency because glutaric acid, like other organic acids, is detoxified by carnitine. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart, liver, and kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of untreated glutaric aciduria.| Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures. Treatment of glutaric aciduria is mainly based on the restriction of lysine intake, supplementation of carnitine, and an intensification of therapy during intercurrent illnesses. The major principle of dietary treatment is to reduce the production of glutaric acid and 3-hydroxyglutaric acid by restriction of natural protein, in general, and of lysine, in particular (PMID: 17465389  , 15505398  ).|
HMDB0002203::3-Hydroxycapric acid is a normally occurring carboxylic acid in human blood plasma. Medium- and long-chain 3-hydroxymonocarboxylic acids represent intermediates in the beta-oxidation of fatty acids. They accumulate in the plasma of patients with an inherited deficiency of long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.35) (PMID: 1912723  ). 3-Hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (HADH) deficiency has been described in diverse clinical cases: juvenile-onset recurrent myoglobinuria, hypoketotic hypoglycemic encephalopathy, hypertrophic/dilatative cardiomyopathy, sudden infant death, and fulminant hepatic failure (OMIM: 231530  ). 3-Hydroxycapric acid has some shape-transforming action on the membrane of intact human erythrocytes (PMID: 7318031  ).|
HMDB0001954::3-Hydroxycaprylic acid is an organic (3-hydroxy dicarboxylic) acid, a metabolite of medium-chain fatty acid oxidation found in human urine. It is believed that urinary 3-hydroxy dicarboxylic acids are derived from the w-oxidation of 3-hydroxy fatty acids and the subsequent b-oxidation of longer-chain 3-hydroxy dicarboxylic acids. (PMID 1870421   ).|
HMDB0061652::DL-3-Hydroxy caproic acid, also known as 3-hydroxycaproate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as medium-chain hydroxy acids and derivatives. These are hydroxy acids with a 6 to 12 carbon atoms long side chain. DL-3-Hydroxy caproic acid is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). DL-3-Hydroxy caproic acid can be converted into ethyl 3-hydroxyhexanoate. |
HMDB0000067::Cholesterol is a sterol (a combination steroid and alcohol) and a lipid found in the cell membranes of all body tissues and transported in the blood plasma of all animals. The name originates from the Greek chole- (bile) and stereos (solid), and the chemical suffix -ol for an alcohol. This is because researchers first identified cholesterol in solid form in gallstones in 1784. In the body, cholesterol can exist in either the free form or as an ester with a single fatty acid (of 10-20 carbons in length) covalently attached to the hydroxyl group at position 3 of the cholesterol ring. Due to the mechanism of synthesis, plasma cholesterol esters tend to contain relatively high proportions of polyunsaturated fatty acids. Most of the cholesterol consumed as a dietary lipid exists as cholesterol esters. Cholesterol esters have a lower solubility in water than cholesterol and are more hydrophobic. They are hydrolyzed by the pancreatic enzyme cholesterol esterase to produce cholesterol and free fatty acids. Cholesterol has vital structural roles in membranes and in lipid metabolism in general. It is a biosynthetic precursor of bile acids, vitamin D, and steroid hormones (glucocorticoids, estrogens, progesterones, androgens and aldosterone). In addition, it contributes to the development and functioning of the central nervous system, and it has major functions in signal transduction and sperm development.| Cholesterol is a ubiquitous component of all animal tissues where much of it is located in the membranes, although it is not evenly distributed. The highest proportion of unesterified cholesterol is in the plasma membrane (roughly 30-50% of the lipid in the membrane or 60-80% of the cholesterol in the cell), while mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum have very low cholesterol contents. Cholesterol is also enriched in early and recycling endosomes, but not in late endosomes.| The brain contains more cholesterol than any other organ where it comprises roughly a quarter of the total free cholesterol in the human body. Of all the organic constituents of blood, only glucose is present in a higher molar concentration than cholesterol. Cholesterol esters appear to be the preferred form for transport in plasma and as a biologically inert storage (de-toxified) form. They do not contribute to membranes but are packed into intracellular lipid particles. Cholesterol molecules (i.e. cholesterol esters) are transported throughout the body via lipoprotein particles. The largest lipoproteins, which primarily transport fats from the intestinal mucosa to the liver, are called chylomicrons. They carry mostly triglyceride fats and cholesterol that are from food, especially internal cholesterol secreted by the liver into the bile. In the liver, chylomicron particles give up triglycerides and some cholesterol. They are then converted into low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles, which carry triglycerides and cholesterol on to other body cells. In healthy individuals, the LDL particles are large and relatively few in number. In contrast, large numbers of small LDL particles are strongly associated with promoting atheromatous disease within the arteries. (Lack of information on LDL particle number and size is one of the major problems of conventional lipid tests.). In conditions with elevated concentrations of oxidized LDL particles, especially small LDL particles, cholesterol promotes atheroma plaque deposits in the walls of arteries, a condition known as atherosclerosis, which is a major contributor to coronary heart disease and other forms of cardiovascular disease.| There is a worldwide trend to believe that lower total cholesterol levels tend to correlate with lower atherosclerosis event rates (though some studies refute this idea). As a result, cholesterol has become a very large focus for the scientific community trying to determine the proper amount of cholesterol needed in a healthy diet. However, the primary association of atherosclerosis with cholesterol has always been specifically with cholesterol transport patterns, not total cholesterol per se. For example, total cholesterol can be low, yet made up primarily of small LDL and small HDL particles and atheroma growth rates are high. In contrast, however, if LDL particle number is low (mostly large particles) and a large percentage of the HDL particles are large (HDL is actively reverse transporting cholesterol), then atheroma growth rates are usually low, even negative, for any given total cholesterol concentration. These effects are further complicated by the relative concentration of asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) in the endothelium since ADMA down-regulates production of nitric oxide, a relaxant of the endothelium. Thus, high levels of ADMA, associated with highly oxidized levels of LDL, pose a heightened risk factor for vascular disease.| Chronically high levels of cholesterol are associated with at least five inborn errors of metabolism, including cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis, cholesteryl ester storage disease, congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia, hypercholesterolemia, and Zellweger syndrome. In chronically high levels, cholesterol can function as an atherogen (causes atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease). Specifically, chronically high levels (from diet or from genetic predisposition or from diseases such as hyperlipidemia) of cholesterol and cholesterol esters lead to an excess of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles. In healthy individuals, the LDL particles are large and relatively few in number. In contrast, large numbers of small LDL particles are strongly associated with promoting atheromatous disease within the arteries. In conditions with elevated concentrations of oxidized LDL particles, especially small LDL particles, cholesterol promotes atheroma plaque deposits in the walls of arteries, a condition known as atherosclerosis, which is a major contributor to coronary heart disease and other forms of cardiovascular disease. Resistin, a protein secreted by fat tissue, has been shown to increase the production of LDL in human liver cells and also degrades LDL receptors in the liver. As a result, the liver is less able to clear cholesterol from the bloodstream. Resistin accelerates the accumulation of LDL in arteries, increasing the risk of heart disease. Cholesterol is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and basic.|
HMDB0000622::Ethylmalonic acid, also known as alpha-carboxybutyric acid or ethylmalonate, is a member of the class of compounds known as branched fatty acids. Branched fatty acids are fatty acids containing one or more branched chains. Ethylmalonic acid is soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). Ethylmalonic acid can be synthesized from malonic acid, and can be synthesized into (S)-ethylmalonyl-CoA and (R)-ethylmalonyl-CoA. Ethylmalonic acid can be found in blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and urine, as well as in human fibroblasts, prostate, and skeletal muscle tissues. Moreover, ethylmalonic acid is found to be associated with anorexia nervosa and malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency.| Ethylmalonic acid is a non-carcinogenic (not listed by IARC) potentially toxic compound. Chronically high levels of ethylmalonic acid are associated with at least two inborn errors of metabolism, including short chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SCAD deficiency) and ethylmalonic encephalopathy. Ethylmalonic acid is identified in the urine of patients with short-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency, which is a fatty acid metabolism disorder. When present in sufficiently high levels, ethylmalonic acid can act as an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Ethylmalonic acid is an organic acid. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart abnormalities, kidney abnormalities, liver damage, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of the untreated IEMs mentioned above. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures.|
HMDB0000792::Sebacic acid is a saturated, straight-chain naturally occurring dicarboxylic acid with 10 carbon atoms. Sebacic acid is a normal urinary acid. In patients with multiple acyl-CoA-dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD), also known as glutaric aciduria type II (GAII), a group of metabolic disorders due to deficiency of either electron transfer flavoprotein or electron transfer flavoprotein ubiquinone oxidoreductase, biochemical data shows an increase in urine sebacic acid excretion. Sebacic acid is found to be associated with carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency and medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, which are inborn errors of metabolism. Sebacic acid is a white flake or powdered crystal slightly soluble in water that has been proposed as an alternative energy substrate in total parenteral nutrition. Sebacic Acid was named from the Latin sebaceus (tallow candle) or sebum (tallow) in reference to its use in the manufacture of candles. Sebacic acid and its derivatives such as azelaic acid have a variety of industrial uses as plasticizers, lubricants, hydraulic fluids, cosmetics, candles, etc. It is used in the synthesis of polyamide and alkyd resins. It is also used as an intermediate for aromatics, antiseptics and painting materials (PMID: 10556649  , 1738216  , 8442769  , 12706375  ).|
HMDB0000893::Suberic acid, also octanedioic acid, is a dicarboxylic acid, with formula C6H12(COOH)2. It is present in the urine of patients with fatty acid oxidation disorders (PMID 10404733  ). A metabolic breakdown product derived from oleic acid. Elevated levels of this unstaruated dicarboxylic acid are found in individuals with medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MCAD). Suberic acid is also found to be associated with carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase deficiency, malonyl-Coa decarboxylase deficiency, which are also inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000011::(R)-3-Hydroxybutyric acid is a butyric acid substituted with a hydroxyl group in the beta or 3 position. 3-hydroxybutyric acid, or beta-hydroxybutyrate, is involved in the synthesis and degradation of ketone bodies. Like the other ketone bodies (acetoacetate and acetone), levels of beta-hydroxybutyrate are raised in the blood and urine in ketosis. Beta-hydroxybutyrate is a typical partial-degradation product of branched-chain amino acids (primarily valine) released from muscle for hepatic and renal gluconeogenesis This acid is metabolized by 3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase (catalyzes the oxidation of D-3-hydroxybutyrate to form acetoacetate, using NAD+ as an electron acceptor). The enzyme functions in nervous tissues and muscles, enabling the use of circulating hydroxybutyrate as a fuel. In the liver mitochondrial matrix, the enzyme can also catalyze the reverse reaction, a step in ketogenesis. 3-Hydroxybutyric acid is a chiral compound having two enantiomers, D-3-hydroxybutyric acid and L-3-hydroxybutyric acid. In humans, beta-hydroxybutyrate is synthesized in the liver from acetyl-CoA, and can be used as an energy source by the brain when blood glucose is low. It can also be used for the synthesis of biodegradable plastics (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0013127::Hydroxybutyrylcarnitine, also known as C4OH Carnitine, is classified as a member of the acyl carnitines. Acyl carnitines are organic compounds containing a fatty acid with the carboxylic acid attached to carnitine through an ester bond. Hydroxybutyrylcarnitine is considered to be a slightly soluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. Hydroxybutyrylcarnitine is a fatty ester lipid molecule. Hydroxybutyrylcarnitine can be found in blood. Within a cell, Hydroxybutyrylcarnitine is primarily located in the extracellular space and near the membrane.|
HMDB0000201::L-Acetylcarnitine (ALCAR or ALC) is an acetic acid ester of carnitine that facilitates movement of acetyl-CoA into the matrices of mammalian mitochondria during the oxidation of fatty acids. In addition to his metabolic role, acetyl-L-carnitine posses unique neuroprotective, neuromodulatory, and neurotrophic properties this may play an important role in counteracting various disease processes (PMID ID: 15363640).|
HMDB0059655::2-Hydroxyglutarate exists in 2 isomers: L-2-hydroxyglutarate acid and D-2-hydroxyglutarate. Both the D and the L stereoisomers of hydroxyglutaric acid (EC 1.1.99.2) are found in body fluids. In humans it is part of butanoate metabolic pathway and can be produced by phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH). More specifically, the enzyme PHGDH catalyzes the NADH-dependent reduction of α-ketoglutarate (AKG) to D-2-hydroxyglutarate (D-2HG). 2-hydroxyglutarate is also the product of gain-of-function mutations in the cytosolic and mitochondrial isoforms of isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH). Additionally, 2-hydroxyglutarate can be converted to α-ketoglutaric acid through the action of 2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase (HGDH). Humans have to variants of this enzyme: D-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase (D2HGDH) and L-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase (L2HGDH). A deficiency in either of these two enzymes can lead to a disease known as 2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria. L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (caused by loss of L2HGDH) is chronic, with early symptoms such as hypotonia, tremors, and epilepsy declining into spongiform leukoencephalopathy, muscular choreodystonia, mental retardation, and psychomotor regression. D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (caused by loss of D2HGDH or gain of function of IDH) is rare, with symptoms including cancer, macrocephaly, cardiomyopathy, mental retardation, hypotonia, and cortical blindness.| 2-hydroxyglutarate was the first oncometabolite (or cancer-causing metabolite) to be formally named or identified. In cancer it is either produced by overexpression of phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH) or is produced in excess by gain-of-function mutations in the cytosolic and mitochondrial isoforms of isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH). IDH is part of TCA cycle and is generated in high abundance when IDH is mutated. 2-hydroxyglutarate is sufficiently similar in structure to 2-oxogluratate (2OG) that it is able to inhibit a range of 2OG-dependent dioxygenases, including histone lysine demethylases (KDMs) and members of the ten-eleven translocation (TET) family of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) hydroxylases. This inhibitory effect leads to alterations in the hypoxia induced factor (HIF)-mediated hypoxic response and alterations in gene expression through global epigenetic remodeling. The net effect is that 2-hydroxyglutarate causes a cascading effect that leads genetic perturbations and malignant transformation. Furthermore, 2-hydroxyglutarate is found to be associated with glutaric aciduria II, which is also an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000023::(S)-3-Hydroxyisobutyric (3-HIBA) acid is an organic acid. 3-HIBA is an intermediate in L-valine metabolism. 3-HIBA plays an important role in the diagnosis of the very rare inherited metabolic diseases 3-hydroxyisobutyric aciduria (OMIM 236795  ) and methylmalonic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency (OMIM 603178  ). Patients with 3-hydroxyisobutyric aciduria excrete a significant amount of 3-HIBA not only during the acute stage but also when stable. 3-hydroxyisobutyric aciduria is caused by a 3-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (PMID: 18329219  ). The severity of this disease varies from case to case. Most patients exhibit dysmorphic features, such as a small triangular face, a long philtrum, low set ears and micrognathia (PMID: 113770040  , 10686279  ). Lactic acidemia is also found in the affected patients, indicating that mitochondrial dysfunction is involved. 3-hydroxyisobutyrate appears to specifically inhibit the function of the respiratory chain complex I-III and mitochondrial creatine kinase (PMID: 18329219  ).|
HMDB0002169::S-(2-carboxypropyl)-Cysteamine enhances the procoagulant activity of factor VIII-East Hartford, a dysfunctional protein due to a light chain thrombin cleavage site mutation (PMID 1569180  ). S-(2-carboxypropyl)-Cysteamine is known to modify mutant proteins with an arg-to-cys substitution (PMID 1569181  ).|
HMDB0012141::(R) 2,3-Dihydroxy-isovalerate is an intermediate in valine, leucine and isoleucine biosynthesis. The pathway of valine biosynthesis is a four-step pathway that shares all of its steps with the parallel pathway of isoleucine biosynthesis. These entwined pathways are part of the superpathway of leucine, valine, and isoleucine biosynthesis , that generates not only isoleucine and valine, but also leucine. (R) 2,3-Dihydroxy-isovalerate is generated from 3-Hydroxy-3-methyl-2-oxobutanoic acid via the enzyme ketol-acid reductoisomerase (EC 1.1.1.86) then it is converted to 2-Oxoisovalerate via the dihydroxy-acid dehydratase (EC:4.2.1.9).|
HMDB0000123::Glycine is a simple, nonessential amino acid, although experimental animals show reduced growth on low-glycine diets. The average adult ingests 3 to 5 grams of glycine daily. Glycine is involved in the body's production of DNA, phospholipids and collagen, and in release of energy. Glycine levels are effectively measured in plasma in both normal patients and those with inborn errors of glycine metabolism (http://www.dcnutrition.com/AminoAcids/). Nonketotic hyperglycinaemia (OMIM 606899  ) is an autosomal recessive condition caused by deficient enzyme activity of the glycine cleavage enzyme system (EC 2.1.1.10). The glycine cleavage enzyme system comprises four proteins: P-, T-, H- and L-proteins (EC 1.4.4.2, EC 2.1.2.10 and EC 1.8.1.4 for P-, T- and L-proteins). Mutations have been described in the GLDC (OMIM 238300  ), AMT (OMIM 238310  ), and GCSH (OMIM 238330  ) genes encoding the P-, T-, and H-proteins respectively. The glycine cleavage system catalyses the oxidative conversion of glycine into carbon dioxide and ammonia, with the remaining one-carbon unit transferred to folate as methylenetetrahydrofolate. It is the main catabolic pathway for glycine and it also contributes to one-carbon metabolism. Patients with a deficiency of this enzyme system have increased glycine in plasma, urine and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with an increased CSF: plasma glycine ratio (PMID 16151895  ). Glycine is also found to be associated with carbamoyl phosphate synthetase deficiency, iminoglycinuria, maple syrup urine disease, phenylketonuria, propionic acidemia, sarcosinemia, and tyrosinemia I, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000157::Hypoxanthine is a naturally occurring purine derivative and a reaction intermediate in the metabolism of adenosine and in the formation of nucleic acids by the salvage pathway. Hypoxanthine is also a spontaneous deamination product of adenine. Lesch-Nyhan disease, an inborn error of metabolism, is caused by deficiency of the purine salvage enzyme hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (OMIN 308000). Hypoxanthine is also found to be associated with xanthinuria type 1, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000289::Uric acid is a heterocyclic purine derivative that is the final oxidation product of purine metabolism. It is produced by the enzyme xanthine oxidase, which oxidizes oxypurines such as xanthine into uric acid. In most mammals, except humans and higher primates, the enzyme uricase further oxidizes uric acid to allantoin. Uric acid is also the end product of nitrogen metabolism in birds and reptiles. In such species, it is excreted in feces as a dry mass. Humans produce only small quantities of uric acid with excess accumulation leading to a type of arthritis known as gout. The loss of uricase in higher primates parallels the similar loss of the ability to synthesize ascorbic acid vitamin C. This may be because in higher primates uric acid partially replaces ascorbic acid. Uric acid is found to be associated with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome and xanthinuria type I, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000292::Xanthine is a purine base found in most body tissues and fluids, certain plants, and some urinary calculi. It is an intermediate in the degradation of adenosine monophosphate to uric acid, being formed by oxidation of hypoxanthine. The methylated xanthine compounds caffeine, theobromine, and theophylline and their derivatives are used in medicine for their bronchodilator effects (Dorland, 28th ed.). Xanthine is found to be associated with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome and xanthinuria type I, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000396::Isolated excretion of 2-ethylhydracrylic acid (2-methylbutyrylglycine; 2-MBG) is the hallmark of short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SBCADD), a defect in the proximal pathway of L-isoleucine oxidation (PMID: 15615815  ). Normal human urine contains small amounts (less than 4 mg/g of creatinine) of 2-ethylhydracrylic acid. Urinary excretion of 2-ethylhydracrylic acid is variably increased in defects of isoleucine oxidation at distal steps in the catabolic pathway (3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase deficiency and methylmalonyl-CoA mutase deficiency) and is diminished when proximal steps of the oxidative pathway are blocked as in branched-chain oxo acid decarboxylase deficiency (maple syrup urine disease) (PMID: 1016232  ).|
HMDB0000187::Serine is a nonessential amino acid derived from glycine. Like all the amino acid building blocks of protein and peptides, serine can become essential under certain conditions, and is thus important in maintaining health and preventing disease. Low-average concentration of serine compared to other amino acids is found in muscle. Serine is highly concentrated in all cell membranes. (http://www.dcnutrition.com/AminoAcids/) |L-Serine may be derived from four possible sources: dietary intake; biosynthesis from the glycolytic intermediate 3-phosphoglycerate; from glycine ; and by protein and phospholipid degradation. Little data is available on the relative contributions of each of these four sources of l-serine to serine homoeostasis.| It is very likely that the predominant source of l-serine will be very different in different tissues and during different stages of human development. In the biosynthetic pathway, the glycolytic intermediate 3-phosphoglycerate is converted into phosphohydroxypyruvate, in a reaction catalyzed by 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (3- PGDH; EC 1.1.1.95). Phosphohydroxypyruvate is metabolized to phosphoserine by phosphohydroxypyruvate aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.52) and, finally, phosphoserine is converted into l-serine by phosphoserine phosphatase (PSP; EC 3.1.3.3). In liver tissue, the serine biosynthetic pathway is regulated in response to dietary and hormonal changes. Of the three synthetic enzymes, the properties of 3-PGDH and PSP are the best documented. Hormonal factors such as glucagon and corticosteroids also influence 3-PGDH and PSP activities in interactions dependent upon the diet. L-serine plays a central role in cellular proliferation. L-Serine is the predominant source of one-carbon groups for the de novo synthesis of purine nucleotides and deoxythymidine monophosphate. It has long been recognized that, in cell cultures, L-serine is a conditional essential amino acid, because it cannot be synthesized in sufficient quantities to meet the cellular demands for its utilization. In recent years, L-serine and the products of its metabolism have been recognized not only to be essential for cell proliferation, but also to be necessary for specific functions in the central nervous system. The findings of altered levels of serine and glycine in patients with psychiatric disorders and the severe neurological abnormalities in patients with defects of L-serine synthesis underscore the importance of L-serine in brain development and function. (PMID 12534373  ).|
HMDB0000267::Pyroglutamic acid (5-oxoproline) is a cyclized derivative of L-glutamic acid. It is an uncommon amino acid derivative in which the free amino group of glutamic acid cyclizes to form a lactam. It is formed nonenzymatically from glutamate, glutamine, and gamma-glutamylated peptides, but it can also be produced by the action of gamma-glutamylcyclotransferase on an L-amino acid.| Elevated blood levels may be associated with problems of glutamine or glutathione metabolism. This compound is found in substantial amounts in brain tissue and other tissues in bound form, especially skin. It is also present in plant tissues. It is sold, over the counter, as a "smart drug" for improving blood circulation in the brain. Pyroglutamate in the urine is a biomarker for the consumption of cheese. When present in sufficiently high levels, pyroglutamic acid can act as an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of pyroglutamic acid are associated with at least five inborn errors of metabolism including 5-oxoprolinuria, 5-oxoprolinase deficiency, glutathione synthetase deficiency, hawkinsinuria, and propionic acidemia. Pyroglutamic acid is an organic acid. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart, liver, and kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of the untreated IEMs mentioned above. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures.|
HMDB0000159::Phenylalanine is an essential amino acid and the precursor of the amino acid tyrosine. Like tyrosine, phenylalanine is also a precursor for catecholamines including tyramine, dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine. Catecholamines are neurotransmitters that act as adrenalin-like substances. Interestingly, several psychotropic drugs (mescaline, morphine, codeine, and papaverine) also have phenylalanine as a constituent. Phenylalanine is highly concentrated in the human brain and plasma. Normal metabolism of phenylalanine requires biopterin, iron, niacin, vitamin B6, copper, and vitamin C. An average adult ingests 5 g of phenylalanine per day and may optimally need up to 8 g daily. Phenylalanine is highly concentrated in a number of high protein foods, such as meat, cottage cheese, and wheat germ. An additional dietary source of phenylalanine is artificial sweeteners containing aspartame. As a general rule, aspartame should be avoided by phenylketonurics and pregnant women. When present in sufficiently high levels, phenylalanine can act as a neurotoxin and a metabotoxin. A neurotoxin is a compound that disrupts or attacks neural cells and neural tissue. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels.| Chronically high levels of phenylalanine are associated with at least five inborn errors of metabolism, including Hartnup disorder, hyperphenylalaninemia due to guanosine triphosphate cyclohydrolase deficiency, phenylketonuria (PKU), tyrosinemia type 2 (or Richner-Hanhart syndrome), and tyrosinemia type III (TYRO3). Phenylketonurics have elevated serum plasma levels of phenylalanine up to 400 times normal. High plasma concentrations of phenylalanine influence the blood-brain barrier transport of large neutral amino acids. The high plasma phenylalanine concentrations increase phenylalanine entry into the brain and restrict the entry of other large neutral amino acids (PMID: 19191004  ). Phenylalanine has been found to interfere with different cerebral enzyme systems. Untreated phenylketonuria (PKU) can lead to intellectual disability, seizures, behavioural problems, and mental disorders. It may also result in a musty smell and lighter skin. Classic PKU dramatically affects myelination and white matter tracts in untreated infants; this may be one major cause of neurological disorders associated with phenylketonuria. Mild phenylketonuria can act as an unsuspected cause of hyperactivity, learning problems, and other developmental problems in children. It has been recently suggested that PKU may resemble amyloid diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, due to the formation of toxic amyloid-like assemblies of phenylalanine (PMID: 22706200  ).| Phenylalanine also has some potential benefits. Phenylalanine can act as an effective pain reliever. Its use in premenstrual syndrome and Parkinson's may enhance the effects of acupuncture and electric transcutaneous nerve stimulation (TENS). Phenylalanine and tyrosine, like L-DOPA, produce a catecholamine-like effect. Phenylalanine is better absorbed than tyrosine and may cause fewer headaches. Low phenylalanine diets have been prescribed for certain cancers with mixed results. For instance, some tumours use more phenylalanine than others (particularly melatonin-producing tumours called melanomas).|
HMDB0000468::Biopterin concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid from patients with Parkinson's disease, in which the nigrostriatal dopamine neurons degenerate, are lower than those from age-matched older controls. In hereditary progressive dystonia/DOPA-responsive dystonia, which is a dopamine deficiency caused by mutations in GTP cyclohydrolase I without neuronal cell death (Segawa's disease), neopterin and biopterin in cerebrospinal fluid decrease in parallel owing to the decreased activity in GTP cyclohydrolase I. GTP cyclohydrolase I (EC 3.5.4.16) is an enzyme that is part of the folate and biopterin biosynthesis pathways. It is responsible for the hydrolysis of guanosine triphosphate (GTP) to form 7,8-dihydroneopterin 3'-triphosphate. (Pteridines (1999), 10(1), 5-13.) Lowered levels of urinary biopterin concomitant with elevated serum phenylalanine concentration occur in a variant type of hyperphenylalaninemia caused by a deficiency of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), the obligatory cofactor for phenylalanine hydroxylase. The most frequent form of this cofactor deficiency is due to lack of 6-pyruvoyl-tetrahydropterin synthase (PTPS) activity, the second enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway for BH4. (PMID 8178819  ) The hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylating system consists of 3 essential components, phenylalanine hydroxylase, dihydropteridine reductase, and the nonprotein coenzyme, tetrahydrobiopterin. The reductase and the pterin coenzyme are also essential components of the tyrosine and tryptophan hydroxylating systems. There are 3 distinct forms of phenylketonuria or hyperphenylalaninemia, each caused by lack of 1 of these essential components. The variant forms of the disease that are caused by the lack of dihydropteridine reductase or tetrahydrobiopterin are characterized by severe neurol. deterioration, impaired functioning of tyrosine and tryptophan hydroxylases, and the resultant deficiency of tyrosine- and tryptophan-derived monoamine neurotransmitters in brain. (PMID 3930837  ).|
HMDB0000140::Glucosylceramide is a glycosphingolipid (ceramide and oligosaccharide) or oligoglycosylceramide with one or more sialic acids (i.e. n-acetylneuraminic acid) linked on the sugar chain. It is a component the cell plasma membrane which modulates cell signal transduction events. Gangliosides have been found to be highly important in immunology. Ganglioside GL1A carries a net-negative charge at pH 7.0 and is acidic. Gangliosides can amount to 6% of the weight of lipids from brain, but they are found at low levels in all animal tissues. Cerebrosides are glycosphingolipids. There are four types of glycosphingolipids, the cerebrosides, sulfatides, globosides and gangliosides. Cerebrosides have a single sugar group linked to ceramide. The most common are galactocerebrosides (containing galactose), the least common are glucocerebrosides (containing glucose). Galactocerebrosides are found predominantly in neuronal cell membranes. In contrast glucocerebrosides are not normally found in membranes. Instead, they are typically intermediates in the synthesis or degradation of more complex glycosphingolipids. Galactocerebrosides are synthesized from ceramide and UDP-galactose. Excess lysosomal accumulation of glucocerebrosides is found in Gaucher disease. Glucosylceramide is found to be associated with hypobetalipoproteinemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0004866::Lactosylceramide (d18:1/12:0) is a lactosylceramide or LacCer. Lactosylceramides are the most important and abundant of the diosylceramides. Lactosylceramides (LacCer) were originally called 'cytolipin H'. It is found in small amounts only in most animal tissues, but it has a number of significant biological functions and it is of great importance as the biosynthetic precursor of most of the neutral oligoglycosylceramides, sulfatides and gangliosides. In animal tissues, biosynthesis of lactosylceramide involves addition of the second monosaccharides unit (galactose) as its nucleotide derivative to monoglucosylceramide, catalysed by a specific beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase on the lumenal side of the Golgi apparatus. The glucosylceramide precursor must first cross from the cytosolic side of the membrane, possibly via the action of a flippase. The lactosylceramide produced can be further glycosylated or transferred to the plasma membrane. Lactosylceramide may assist in stabilizing the plasma membrane and activating receptor molecules in the special micro-domains or rafts, as with the cerebrosides. It may also have its own specialized function in the immunological system in that it is known to bind to specific bacteria. In addition, it is believed that a number of pro-inflammatory factors activate lactosylceramide synthase to generate lactosylceramide, which in turn activates "oxygen-sensitive" signalling pathways that affect such cellular processes as proliferation, adhesion, migration and angiogenesis. Dysfunctions in these pathways can affect several diseases of the cardiovascular system, cancer and inflammatory states, so lactosylceramide metabolism is a potential target for new therapeutic treatments. beta-D-galactosyl-1,4-beta-D-glucosylceramide is the second to last step in the synthesis of N-Acylsphingosine and is converted. from Glucosylceramide via the enzyme beta-1,4-galactosyltransferase 6 (EC:2.4.1.-). It can be converted to Glucosylceramide via the enzyme beta-galactosidase (EC:3.2.1.23). Moreover, lactosylceramide (D18:1/12:0) is found to be associated with abetalipoproteinemia and hypobetalipoproteinemia, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0004877::Trihexosylceramide (D18:1/12:0) is a glycosphingolipid which contains a trisaccharide (galactose-galactose-glucose) moiety bound in glycosidic linkage to the hydroxyl group of ceramide as the polar head group. It accumulates in tissue due to a defect in ceramide trihexosidase and is the cause of angiokeratoma corporis diffusum (Fabry disease). Although normal human colonic epithelial cells lack the glycosphingolipid globotriaosylceramide (Gb(3)), this molecule is highly expressed in metastatic colon cancer (PubMed ID 16365318). Moreover, trihexosylceramide (D18:1/12:0) is found to be associated with hypobetalipoproteinemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0004880::Trihexosylceramide (D18:1/18:0) is a glycosphingolipid which contains a trisaccharide (galactose-galactose-glucose) moiety bound in glycosidic linkage to the hydroxyl group of ceramide as the polar head group. It accumulates in tissue due to a defect in ceramide trihexosidase and is the cause of angiokeratoma corporis diffusum (Fabry disease). Although normal human colonic epithelial cells lack the glycosphingolipid globotriaosylceramide (Gb(3)), this molecule is highly expressed in metastatic colon cancer (PubMed ID 16365318 ). Moreover, trihexosylceramide (D18:1/18:0) is found to be associated with hypobetalipoproteinemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0004882::Trihexosylceramide (D18:1/22:0) is a glycosphingolipid which contains a trisaccharide (galactose-galactose-glucose) moiety bound in glycosidic linkage to the hydroxyl group of ceramide as the polar head group. It accumulates in tissue due to a defect in ceramide trihexosidase and is the cause of angiokeratoma corporis diffusum (Fabry disease). Although normal human colonic epithelial cells lack the glycosphingolipid globotriaosylceramide (Gb(3)), this molecule is highly expressed in metastatic colon cancer (PubMed ID 16365318 ). Moreover, trihexosylceramide (D18:1/22:0) is found to be associated with hypobetalipoproteinemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0004886::Trihexosylceramide is a glycosphingolipid which contains a trisaccharide (galactose-galactose-glucose) moiety bound in glycosidic linkage to the hydroxyl group of ceramide as the polar head group. It accumulates in tissue due to a defect in ceramide trihexosidase and is the cause of angiokeratoma corporis diffusum (Fabry disease). Although normal human colonic epithelial cells lack the glycosphingolipid globotriaosylceramide (Gb(3)), this molecule is highly expressed in metastatic colon cancer (PubMed ID 16365318 ).|
HMDB0004884::Trihexosylceramide is a glycosphingolipid which contains a trisaccharide (galactose-galactose-glucose) moiety bound in glycosidic linkage to the hydroxyl group of ceramide as the polar head group. It accumulates in tissue due to a defect in ceramide trihexosidase and is the cause of angiokeratoma corporis diffusum (Fabry disease). Although normal human colonic epithelial cells lack the glycosphingolipid globotriaosylceramide (Gb(3)), this molecule is highly expressed in metastatic colon cancer (PubMed ID 16365318 ).|
HMDB0004958::Tetrahexosylceramide (d18:1/12:0) is a glycosphingolipid (ceramide and oligosaccharide)or oligoglycosylceramide with one or more sialic acids (i.e. n-acetylneuraminic acid) linked on the sugar chain. Tetrahexosylceramide contains a tetrasaccharide moiety bound in glycosidic linkage to the hydroxyl group of ceramide as the polar head group. It is a component the cell plasma membrane which modulates cell signal transduction events. Gangliosides have been found to be highly important in immunology. Ganglioside Gb4 carries a net-negative charge at pH 7.0 and is acidic. Gangliosides can amount to 6% of the weight of lipids from brain, but they are found at low levels in all animal tissues.Globosides are glycosphingolipids. There are four types of glycosphingolipids, the cerebrosides, sulfatides, globosides and gangliosides. Globosides are cerebrosides that contain additional carbohydrates, predominantly galactose, glucose or GalNAc. Lactosyl ceramide is a globoside found in erythrocyte plasma membranes. Globotriaosylceramide (also called ceramide trihexoside) contains glucose and two moles of galactose and accumulates, primarily in the kidneys, of patients suffering from Fabry disease.|
HMDB0004844::Ganglioside GM3 (d18:1/16:0) is a glycosphingolipid (ceramide and oligosaccharide)or oligoglycosylceramide with one or more sialic acids (i.e. n-acetylneuraminic acid) linked on the sugar chain. It is a component the cell plasma membrane which modulates cell signal transduction events. Gangliosides have been found to be highly important in immunology. Ganglioside GM3 carries a net-negative charge at pH 7.0 and is acidic. Gangliosides can amount to 6% of the weight of lipids from brain, but they are found at low levels in all animal tissuesGangliosides are glycosphingolipids. There are four types of glycosphingolipids, the cerebrosides, sulfatides, globosides and gangliosides. Gangliosides are very similar to globosides except that they also contain N-acetyl neuraminic acid (NANA) in varying amounts. The specific names for the gangliosides provide information about their structure. The letter G refers to ganglioside, and the subscripts M, D, T and Q indicate that the molecule contains mono-, di-, tri and quatra-sialic acid. The numbered subscripts 1, 2 and 3 refer to the carbohydrate sequence that is attached to the ceramide. In particular, 1 stands for GalGalNAcGalGlc-ceramide, 2 stands for GalNAcGalGlc-ceramide and 3 stands for GalGlc-ceramide. Deficiencies in lysosomal enzymes that degrade the carbohydrate portions of various gangliosides are responsible for a number of lysosomal storage diseases such as Tay-Sachs disease, Sandhoff disease, and GM1 gangliosidosis. The carbohydrate portion of the ganglioside GM1 is the site of attachment of cholera toxin, the protein secreted by Vibrio cholerae.|
HMDB0001893::alpha-Tocopherol is traditionally recognized as the most active form of vitamin E in humans and is a powerful biological antioxidant. The measurement of "vitamin E" activity in international units (IU) was based on fertility enhancement by the prevention of spontaneous abortions in pregnant rats relative to alpha-Tocopherol. Natural vitamin E exists in eight different forms or isomers: four tocopherols and four tocotrienols. In foods, the most abundant sources of vitamin E are vegetable oils such as palm oil, sunflower, corn, soybean, and olive oil. Nuts, sunflower seeds, and wheat germ are also good sources (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0000305::Vitamin A (retinol) is a yellow fat-soluble, antioxidant vitamin important in vision and bone growth. It belongs to the family of chemical compounds known as retinoids. Retinol is ingested in a precursor form; animal sources (milk and eggs) contain retinyl esters, whereas plants (carrots, spinach) contain pro-vitamin A carotenoids. Hydrolysis of retinyl esters results in retinol while pro-vitamin A carotenoids can be cleaved to produce retinal. Retinal, also known as retinaldehyde, can be reversibly reduced to produce retinol or it can be irreversibly oxidized to produce retinoic acid. Retinol and derivatives of retinol that play an essential role in metabolic functioning of the retina, the growth of and differentiation of epithelial tissue, the growth of bone, reproduction, and the immune response. Dietary vitamin A is derived from a variety of carotenoids found in plants. It is enriched in the liver, egg yolks, and the fat component of dairy products.|
HMDB0000657::Copper is an essential nutrient to all higher plants and animals. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. In animals, it is found primarily in the bloodstream, as a cofactor in various enzymes, and in copper-based pigments. In the body, copper shifts between the cuprous (Cu1+) and cupric (Cu2+) forms, though the majority of the body's copper is in the Cu2+ form. The ability of copper to easily accept and donate electrons explains its important role in oxidation-reduction (redox) reactions and in scavenging free radicals.| Copper is a critical functional component of a number of essential enzymes known as cuproenzymes. For instance, the copper-dependent enzyme, cytochrome c oxidase, plays a critical role in cellular energy production. By catalyzing the reduction of molecular oxygen (O2) to water (H2O), cytochrome c oxidase generates an electrical gradient used by the mitochondria to create the vital energy-storing molecule, ATP. Another cuproenzyme, lysyl oxidase, is required for the cross-linking of collagen and elastin, which are essential for the formation of strong and flexible connective tissue. Another cuproeznyme, Monoamine oxidase (MAO), plays a role in the metabolism of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine. MAO also functions in the degradation of the neurotransmitter serotonin, which is the basis for the use of MAO inhibitors as antidepressants. One of the most important cuproenzymes is Superoxide dismutase (SOD). SOD functions as an antioxidant by catalyzing the conversion of superoxide radicals (free radicals or ROS) to hydrogen peroxide, which can subsequently be reduced to water by other antioxidant enzymes. Two forms of SOD contain copper: 1) copper/zinc SOD is found within most cells of the body, including red blood cells, and 2) extracellular SOD is a copper-containing enzyme found at high levels in the lungs and low levels in blood plasma. In sufficient amounts, copper can be poisonous or even fatal to organisms. Copper is normally bound to cuproenzymes (such as SOD, MOA) and is thus only toxic when unsequestered and unmediated.| It is believed that zinc and copper compete for absorption in the digestive tract so that a diet that is excessive in one of these minerals may result in a deficiency in the other. An imbalance of zinc and copper status might be involved in human hypertension. Furthermore, copper is found to be associated with hyperzincaemia and hypercalprotectinaemia and Wilson's disease, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0015531::Iron is a metallic element found in certain minerals, in nearly all soils, and in mineral waters. Iron is required for life. It exists in all living species, ranging from bacteria to humans. It can be found primarily in blood and it is an essential constituent of hemoglobin, cytochrome, and other components of respiratory enzyme systems. Its chief functions are in the transport of oxygen to tissue (hemoglobin) and in cellular oxidation mechanisms. Depletion of iron stores may result in iron-deficiency anemia. Iron is used to build up the blood in anemia. In humans, iron is involved in several metabolic pathways, some of which include the rofecoxib pathway, magnesium salicylate action pathway, etodolac pathway, and diclofenac pathway. Iron is also involved in several metabolic disorders, some of which include adenine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency (APRT), porphyria variegata (PV), adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency, and AICA-ribosiduria. The major activity of supplemental iron is in the prevention and treatment of iron-deficiency anemia. Iron has putative immune-enhancing, anticarcinogenic, and cognition-enhancing activities. Iron can be found in a number of food items such as chinese water chestnut, hyssop, daikon radish, and peppermint, which makes it a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0015532::Zinc is an essential element, necessary for sustaining all life. It is a trace element in the diet, forming an essential part of many enzymes, and playing an important role in protein synthesis and in cell division. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. It is estimated that 3000 of the hundreds of thousands of proteins in the human body contain zinc prosthetic groups. In addition, there are over a dozen cell types in the human body that secrete zinc ions, and the roles of these secreted zinc signals in medicine and health are now being actively studied. Intriguingly, brain cells in the mammalian forebrain are one type of cell that secretes zinc, along with its other neuronal messenger substances. Cells in the salivary gland, prostate, immune system, and intestine are other types that secrete zinc. Obtaining a sufficient zinc intake during pregnancy and in young children is a problem, especially among those who cannot afford a good and varied diet. Zinc deficiency is associated with anemia, short stature, hypogonadism, impaired wound healing, and geophagia. Brain development is stunted by zinc deficiency in utero and in youth. Zinc is an activator of certain enzymes, such as carbonic anhydrase. Carbonic anhydrase is important in the transport of carbon dioxide in vertebrate blood. Even though zinc is an essential requirement for a healthy body, too much zinc can be harmful. Excessive absorption of zinc can also suppress copper and iron absorption. The free zinc ion in solution is highly toxic to plants, invertebrates, and even vertebrate fish. The Free Ion Activity Model (FIAM) is well-established in the literature and shows that just micromolar amounts of the free ion kill some organisms.|
HMDB0000737::Heptacarboxylporphyrin I, also known as heptaporphyrin, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as porphyrins. Porphyrins are compounds containing a fundamental skeleton of four pyrrole nuclei united through the alpha-positions by four methine groups to form a macrocyclic structure. Heptacarboxylporphyrin I is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Heptacarboxylporphyrin I has been found in human liver tissue, and has also been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, heptacarboxylporphyrin i is primarily located in the cytoplasm and mitochondria.|
HMDB0000643::Coproporphyrin I is a porphyrin metabolite arising from heme synthesis. Porphyrins are pigments found in both animal and plant life. Coproporphyrin I is a tetrapyrrole dead-end product from the spontaneous oxidation of the methylene bridges of coproporphynogen, arising from heme synthesis and secreted in feces and urine. Increased levels of coproporphyrins can indicate congenital erythropoietic porphyria or sideroblastic anaemia. Porphyria is a pathological state characterised by abnormalities of porphyrin metabolism and results in the excretion of large quantities of porphyrins in the urine and in extreme sensitivity to light. A large number of factors are capable of increasing porphyrin excretion, owing to different and multiple causes and etiologies: 1) the main site of the chronic hepatic porphyria disease process concentrates on the liver, 2) a functional and morphologic liver injury is almost regularly associated with this chronic porphyria, 3) the toxic form due to occupational and environmental exposure takes mainly a subclinical course. Hepatic factors includes disturbance in coproporphyrinogen metabolism, which results from inhibition of coproporphyrinogen oxidase as well as from the rapid loss from, and diminished utilization of coproporphyrinogen in the hepatocytes, which may also explain why coproporphyrin, its autoxidation product, predominates physiologically in the urine; decreased biliary excretion of coproporphyrin leading to a compensatory urinary excretion, so that the coproporphyrin ring isomer ratio (1:III) becomes a sensitive index for impaired liver function and intrahepatic cholestasis; and disturbed activity of hepatic uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase. In itself, secondary coproporphyrinuria is not associated with porphyria symptoms of a hepatologic-gastroenterologic, neurologic, or dermatologic order, even though coproporphyrinuria can occur with such symptoms. (PMID: 3327428  ).|
HMDB0000570::Coproporphyrin III is a porphyrin metabolite arising from heme synthesis. Porphyrins are pigments found in both animal and plant life. Coproporphyrin III is a tetrapyrrole dead-end product from the spontaneous oxidation of the methylene bridges of coproporphynogen, arising from heme synthesis and secreted in feces and urine. Increased levels of coproporphyrins can indicate congenital erythropoietic porphyria or sideroblastic anaemia, which are inherited disorders. Porphyria is a pathological state characterised by abnormalities of porphyrin metabolism and results in the excretion of large quantities of porphyrins in the urine and in extreme sensitivity to light. A large number of factors are capable of increasing porphyrin excretion, owing to different and multiple causes and etiologies: 1) the main site of the chronic hepatic porphyria disease process concentrates on the liver, 2) a functional and morphologic liver injury is almost regularly associated with this chronic porphyria, 3) the toxic form due to occupational and environmental exposure takes mainly a subclinical course. Hepatic factors includes disturbance in coproporphyrinogen metabolism, which results from inhibition of coproporphyrinogen oxidase as well as from the rapid loss from, and diminished utilization of coproporphyrinogen in the hepatocytes, which may also explain why coproporphyrin, its autoxidation product, predominates physiologically in the urine; decreased biliary excretion of coproporphyrin leading to a compensatory urinary excretion, so that the coproporphyrin ring isomer ratio (1:III) becomes a sensitive index for impaired liver function and intrahepatic cholestasis; and disturbed activity of hepatic uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase. In itself, secondary coproporphyrinuria is not associated with porphyria symptoms of a hepatologic-gastroenterologic, neurologic, or dermatologic order, even though coproporphyrinuria can occur with such symptoms. (PMID: 3327428  ).|
HMDB0000245::Porphobilinogen (PBG) is a pyrrole-containing intermediate in the biosynthesis of porphyrins. It is generated from aminolevulinate (ALA) by the enzyme ALA dehydratase. Porphobilinogen is then converted into hydroxymethylbilane by the enzyme porphobilinogen deaminase (also known as hydroxymethylbilane synthase). Under certain conditions, porphobilinogen can act as a phototoxin, a neurotoxin, and a metabotoxin. A phototoxin leads to cell damage upon exposure to light. A neurotoxin causes damage to nerve cells and nerve tissues. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of porphyrins are associated with porphyrias such as porphyria variegate, acute intermittent porphyria, and hereditary coproporphyria (HCP). There are several types of porphyrias (most are inherited). Hepatic porphyrias are characterized by acute neurological attacks (seizures, psychosis, extreme back and abdominal pain, and an acute polyneuropathy), while the erythropoietic forms present with skin problems (usually a light-sensitive blistering rash and increased hair growth). The neurotoxicity of porphyrins may be due to their selective interactions with tubulin, which disrupt microtubule formation and cause neural malformations (PMID: 3441503  ).|
HMDB0001149::5-Aminolevulinic acid is an intermediate in heme synthesis. This is the first compound in the porphyrin synthesis pathway. It is produced by the enzyme ALA synthase, from glycine and succinyl CoA. This reaction is known as the Shemin pathway. Aminolevulinic acid plus blue light illumination using a blue light photodynamic therapy illuminator is indicated for the treatment of minimally to moderately thick actinic keratoses of the face or scalp.|
HMDB0000068::Epinephrine is a catecholamine, a sympathomimetic monoamine derived from the amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine. It is the active sympathomimetic hormone secreted from the adrenal medulla in most species. It stimulates both the alpha- and beta- adrenergic systems, causes systemic vasoconstriction and gastrointestinal relaxation, stimulates the heart, and dilates bronchi and cerebral vessels. It is used in asthma and cardiac failure and to delay absorption of local anesthetics. Epinephrine also constricts arterioles in the skin and gut while dilating arterioles in leg muscles. It elevates the blood sugar level by increasing hydrolysis of glycogen to glucose in the liver, and at the same time begins the breakdown of lipids in adipocytes. Epinephrine has a suppressive effect on the immune system.|
HMDB0000101::Deoxyadenosine is a derivative of the nucleoside adenosine. It is composed of adenine attached to a deoxyribose moiety via a N9-glycosidic bond. Deoxyribose differs from ribose by the absence of oxygen in the 3' position of its ribose ring. Deoxyadenosine is a critical component of DNA. When present in sufficiently high levels, deoxyadensoine can act as an immunotoxin and a metabotoxin. An immunotoxin disrupts, limits the function, or destroys immune cells. A metabotoxin is an endogenous metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of deoxyadenosine are associated with adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, an inborn error of metabolism. ADA deficiency damages the immune system and causes severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID). People with SCID lack virtually all immune protection from bacteria, viruses, and fungi. They are prone to repeated and persistent infections that can be very serious or life-threatening. These infections are often caused by "opportunistic" organisms that ordinarily do not cause illness in people with a normal immune system. The main symptoms of ADA deficiency are pneumonia, chronic diarrhea, and widespread skin rashes. The mechanism by which dATP functions as an immunotoxin is as follows: because deoxyadenosine is a precursor to dATP, a buildup of dATP in cells inhibits ribonucleotide reductase and prevents DNA synthesis, so cells are unable to divide. Since developing T cells and B cells are some of the most mitotically active cells, they are unable to divide and propagate to respond to immune challenges. High levels of deoxyadenosine also lead to an increase in S-adenosylhomocysteine, which is toxic to immature lymphocytes.|
HMDB0011599::1-Methyladenine is the product of reaction between 1-methyladenosine and water which is catalyzed by 1-methyladenosine nucleosidase (EC:3.2.2.13). 1-Methyladenine is a product of alkylation damage in DNA which can be repaired by damage reversal by oxidative demethylation, a reaction requiring ferrous iron and 2-oxoglutarate as cofactor and co-substrate, respectively (PMID:15576352  ). 1-Methyladenine is found to be associated with adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0001532::Deoxyadenosine triphosphate (dATP) is a purine nucleoside triphosphate used in cells for DNA synthesis. A nucleoside triphosphate is a molecule type that contains a nucleoside with three phosphates bound to it. dATP contains the sugar deoxyribose, a precursor to DNA synthesis whereby the two existing phosphate groups are cleaved with the remaining deoxyadenosine monophosphate being incorporated into DNA during replication. Due to its enzymatic incorporation into DNA, photoreactive dATP analogs such as N6-[4-azidobenzoyl–(2-aminoethyl)]-2′-deoxyadenosine-5′-triphosphate (AB-dATP) and N6-[4-[3-(trifluoromethyl)-diazirin-3-yl]benzoyl-(2-aminoethyl)]-2′-deoxyadenosine-5′-triphosphate (DB-dATP) have been used for DNA photoaffinity labeling. When present in sufficiently high levels, dATP can act as an immunotoxin and a metabotoxin. An immunotoxin disrupts, limits the function, or destroys immune cells. A metabotoxin is an endogenous metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of deoxyadenosine triphosphate are associated with adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, an inborn error of metabolism. ADA deficiency damages the immune system and causes severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID). People with SCID lack virtually all immune protection from bacteria, viruses, and fungi. They are prone to repeated and persistent infections that can be very serious or life-threatening. These infections are often caused by "opportunistic" organisms that ordinarily do not cause illness in people with a normal immune system. The main symptoms of ADA deficiency are pneumonia, chronic diarrhea, and widespread skin rashes. The mechanism by which dATP functions as an immunotoxin is as follows: a buildup of dATP in cells inhibits ribonucleotide reductase and prevents DNA synthesis, so cells are unable to divide. Since developing T cells and B cells are some of the most mitotically active cells, they are unable to divide and propagate to respond to immune challenges.|
HMDB0000939::S-Adenosyl-L-homocysteine (SAH) is formed by the demethylation of S-adenosyl-L-methionine. S-Adenosylhomocysteine (AdoHcy or SAH) is also the immediate precursor of all of the homocysteine produced in the body. The reaction is catalyzed by S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase and is reversible with the equilibrium favoring formation of SAH. In vivo, the reaction is driven in the direction of homocysteine formation by the action of the enzyme adenosine deaminase which converts the second product of the S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase reaction, adenosine, to inosine. Except for methyl transfer from betaine and from methylcobalamin in the methionine synthase reaction, SAH is the product of all methylation reactions that involve S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) as the methyl donor. Methylation is significant in epigenetic regulation of protein expression via DNA and histone methylation. The inhibition of these SAM-mediated processes by SAH is a proven mechanism for metabolic alteration. Because the conversion of SAH to homocysteine is reversible, with the equilibrium favoring the formation of SAH, increases in plasma homocysteine are accompanied by an elevation of SAH in most cases. Disturbances in the transmethylation pathway indicated by abnormal SAH, SAM, or their ratio have been reported in many neurodegenerative diseases, such as dementia, depression, and Parkinson's disease (PMID: 18065573  , 17892439  ). Therefore, when present in sufficiently high levels, S-adenosylhomocysteine can act as an immunotoxin and a metabotoxin. An immunotoxin disrupts, limits the function, or destroys immune cells. A metabotoxin is an endogenous metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of S-adenosylhomocysteine are associated with S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) hydrolase deficiency and adenosine deaminase deficiency. S-Adenosylhomocysteine forms when there are elevated levels of homocysteine and adenosine. S-Adenosyl-L-homocysteine is a potent inhibitor of S-adenosyl-L-methionine-dependent methylation reactions. It is toxic to immature lymphocytes and can lead to immunosuppression (PMID: 221926  ).|
HMDB0001185::S-Adenosylmethionine (CAS: 29908-03-0), also known as SAM or AdoMet, is a physiologic methyl radical donor involved in enzymatic transmethylation reactions and present in all living organisms. It possesses anti-inflammatory activity and has been used in the treatment of chronic liver disease (From Merck, 11th ed). S-Adenosylmethionine is a natural substance present in the cells of the body. It plays a crucial biochemical role by donating a one-carbon methyl group in a process called transmethylation. S-Adenosylmethionine, formed from the reaction of L-methionine and adenosine triphosphate catalyzed by the enzyme S-adenosylmethionine synthetase, is the methyl-group donor in the biosynthesis of both DNA and RNA nucleic acids, phospholipids, proteins, epinephrine, melatonin, creatine, and other molecules.|
HMDB0000696::Methionine is an essential amino acid (there are 9 essential amino acids) required for normal growth and development of humans, other mammals, and avian species. In addition to being a substrate for protein synthesis, it is an intermediate in transmethylation reactions, serving as the major methyl group donor in vivo, including the methyl groups for DNA and RNA intermediates. Methionine is a methyl acceptor for 5-methyltetrahydrofolate-homocysteine methyltransferase (methionine synthase), the only reaction that allows for the recycling of this form of folate, and is also a methyl acceptor for the catabolism of betaine. Methionine is the metabolic precursor for cysteine. Only the sulfur atom from methionine is transferred to cysteine; the carbon skeleton of cysteine is donated by serine (PMID: 16702340  ). There is a general consensus concerning normal sulfur amino acid (SAA) requirements. WHO recommendations amount to 13 mg/kg per 24 h in healthy adults. This amount is roughly doubled in artificial nutrition regimens. In disease or after trauma, requirements may be altered for methionine, cysteine, and taurine. Although in specific cases of congenital enzyme deficiency, prematurity, or diminished liver function, hypermethioninemia or hyperhomocysteinemia may occur, SAA supplementation can be considered safe in amounts exceeding 2-3 times the minimum recommended daily intake. Apart from some very specific indications (e.g. acetaminophen poisoning) the usefulness of SAA supplementation is not yet established (PMID: 16702341  ).| Methionine is known to exacerbate psychopathological symptoms in schizophrenic patients, but there is no evidence of similar effects in healthy subjects. The role of methionine as a precursor of homocysteine is the most notable cause for concern. Acute doses of methionine can lead to acute increases in plasma homocysteine, which can be used as an index of the susceptibility to cardiovascular disease. Sufficiently high doses of methionine can actually result in death. Longer-term studies in adults have indicated no adverse consequences of moderate fluctuations in dietary methionine intake, but intakes higher than 5 times the normal amount resulted in elevated homocysteine levels. These effects of methionine on homocysteine and vascular function are moderated by supplements of vitamins B-6, B-12, C, and folic acid (PMID: 16702346  ). When present in sufficiently high levels, methionine can act as an atherogen and a metabotoxin. An atherogen is a compound that when present at chronically high levels causes atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels.| Chronically high levels of methionine are associated with at least ten inborn errors of metabolism, including cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency, glycine N-methyltransferase deficiency, homocystinuria, tyrosinemia, galactosemia, homocystinuria-megaloblastic anemia due to defects in cobalamin metabolism, methionine adenosyltransferase deficiency, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency, and S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) hydrolase deficiency. Chronically elevated levels of methionine in infants can lead to intellectual disability and other neurological problems, delays in motor skills, sluggishness, muscle weakness, and liver problems. Many individuals with these metabolic disorders tend to develop cardiovascular disease later in life. Studies on feeding rodents high levels of methionine have shown that methionine promotes atherosclerotic plaques independently of homocysteine levels (PMID: 26647293  ). A similar study in Finnish men showed the same effect (PMID: 16487911  ).|
HMDB0000050::Adenosine is a nucleoside that is composed of adenine and D-ribose. Adenosine or adenosine derivatives play many important biological roles in addition to being components of DNA and RNA. For instance, adenosine plays an important role in energy transfer as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and adenosine diphosphate (ADP). It also plays a role in signal transduction as cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). Adenosine itself is both a neurotransmitter and potent vasodilator. When administered intravenously adenosine causes transient heart block in the AV node. Due to the effects of adenosine on AV node-dependent supraventricular tachycardia, adenosine is considered a class V antiarrhythmic agent. Overdoses of adenosine intake (as a drug) can lead to several side effects including chest pain, feeling faint, shortness of breath, and tingling of the senses. Serious side effects include a worsening dysrhythmia and low blood pressure. When present in sufficiently high levels, adenosine can act as an immunotoxin and a metabotoxin. An immunotoxin disrupts, limits the function, or destroys immune cells. A metabotoxin is an endogenous metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of adenosine are associated with adenosine deaminase deficiency. Adenosine is a precursor to deoxyadenosine, which is a precursor to dATP. A buildup of dATP in cells inhibits ribonucleotide reductase and prevents DNA synthesis, so cells are unable to divide. Since developing T cells and B cells are some of the most mitotically active cells, they are unable to divide and propagate to respond to immune challenges. High levels of deoxyadenosine also lead to an increase in S-adenosylhomocysteine, which is toxic to immature lymphocytes.|
HMDB0000912::Succinyladenosine (SAdo) is one of the dephosphorylated enzyme substrate that accumulates in body fluids of patients with adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) deficiency, the other being 5-amino-4-imidazole-N-succinocarboxamide riboside (SAICAr). ADSL is an inherited metabolic disease characterized by various degrees of psychomotor retardation (PMID 15902552  ). The severity of the clinical presentation correlates with a low S-Ado/SAICAr ratio in body fluids (PMID: 15571235  ). Normally Succinyladenosine is not found in blood or CSF but may be detected in trace amounts in urine (OMIM 103050  ). Succinyladenosine is also found to be associated with fumarase deficiency, another inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000265::Liothyronine is a T3 thyroid hormone normally synthesized and secreted by the thyroid gland in much smaller quantities than thyroxine (T4). Most T3 is derived from peripheral monodeiodination of T4 at the 5' position of the outer ring of the iodothyronine nucleus. The hormone finally delivered and used by the tissues is mainly T3. Mildly toxic by ingestion. An experimental teratogen. Experimental reproductive effects. When heated to decomposition it emits toxic fumes of NOx, I(-), and Cl(-). (Sax's Dangerous Properties of Industrial Materials).|
HMDB0000363::17a-Hydroxypregnenolone is a 21-carbon steroid that is converted from pregnenolone by cytochrome P450 17alpha hydroxylase/C17,20 lyase (CYP17, EC 1.14.99.9). 17a-Hydroxypregnenolone is an intermediate in the delta-5 pathway of biosynthesis of gonadal steroid hormones and the adrenal corticosteroids. The first, rate-limiting and hormonally regulated step in the biosynthesis of all steroid hormones is the conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone. The conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone is accomplished by the cleavage of the cholesterol side chain, catalyzed by a mitochondrial cytochrome P450 enzyme termed P450scc where scc designates Side Chain Cleavage. All steroid hormones are made from the pregnenolone produced by P450scc; thus, the presence or absence of each of the activities of CYP17 directs this pregnenolone towards its final metabolic pathway. While all cytochrome P450 enzymes can catalyze multiple reactions on a single active site, CYP17 is the only one described to date in which these multiple activities are differentially regulated by a physiologic process. 17a-Hydroxypregnenolone is converted to dehydroepiandrosterone by the 17,20 lyase activity of CYP17. The ratio of the 17,20 lyase to 17 alpha-hydroxylase activity of CYP17 determines the ratio of C21 to C19 steroids produced. This ratio is regulated post-translationally by at least three factors: the abundance of the electron-donating protein P450 oxidoreductase, the presence of cytochrome b5, and the serine phosphorylation of CYP17. (PMID: 12573809  ).|
HMDB0001830::The major progestational steroid that is secreted primarily by the corpus luteum and the placenta. Progesterone acts on the uterus, the mammary glands and the brain. It is required in embryo implantation, pregnancy maintenance, and the development of mammary tissue for milk production. Progesterone, converted from pregnenolone, also serves as an intermediate in the biosynthesis of gonadal steroid hormones and adrenal corticosteroids (Pubchem). Progesterone is a C-21 steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy (supports gestation) and embryogenesis of humans and other species. Progesterone belongs to a class of hormones called progestagens, and is the major naturally occurring human progestagen (Wikipedia). During implantation and gestation, progesterone appears to decrease the maternal immune response to allow for the acceptance of the pregnancy. Progesterone decreases contractility of the uterine smooth muscle. The fetus metabolizes placental progesterone in the production of adrenal mineralo- and glucosteroids. A drop in progesterone levels is possibly one step that facilitates the onset of labor. In addition progesterone inhibits lactation during pregnancy. The fall in progesterone levels following delivery is one of the triggers for milk production (Wikipedia). Progesterone is found to be associated with pregnene hydroxylation deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000151::Estradiol is the most potent form of mammalian estrogenic steroids. Estradiol is produced in the ovaries.| The ovary requires both luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) to produce sex steroids. LH stimulates the cells surrounding the follicle to produce progesterone and androgens. The androgens diffuse across the basement membrane to the granulosa cell layer, where, under the action of FSH, they are aromatized to estrogens, mainly estradiol. The ovary shows cyclical activity, unlike the testis that is maintained in a more or less constant state of activity. Hormone secretions vary according to the phase of the menstrual cycle. In the developing follicle LH receptors (LH-R) are only located on the thecal cells and FSH receptors (FSHR) on the granulosa cells. The dominant pre-ovulatory follicle develops LH-Rs on the granulosa cells prior to the LH surge. Thecal cells of the preovulatory follicle also develop the capacity to synthesize estradiol and this persists when the thecal cells become incorporated into the corpus luteum. After ovulation, the empty follicle is remodelled and plays an important role in the second half or luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. This phase is dominated by progesterone and, to a lesser extent, estradiol secretion by the corpus luteum. estradiol is also synthesized locally from cholesterol through testosterone in the hippocampus and acts rapidly to modulate neuronal synaptic plasticity. Localization of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) in spines in addition to nuclei of principal neurons implies that synaptic ERalpha is responsible for rapid modulation of synaptic plasticity by endogenous estradiol.| estradiol is a potent endogenous antioxidant which suppresses hepatic fibrosis in animal models, and attenuates induction of redox sensitive transcription factors, hepatocyte apoptosis and hepatic stellate cells activation by inhibiting a generation of reactive oxygen species in primary cultures. This suggests that the greater progression of hepatic fibrosis and hepatocellular carcinoma in men and postmenopausal women may be due, at least in part, to lower production of estradiol and a reduced response to the action of estradiol. estradiol has been reported to induce the production of interferon (INF)-gamma in lymphocytes, and augments an antigen-specific primary antibody response in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. IFN-gamma is a potent cytokine with immunomodulatory and antiproliferative properties. Therefore, female subjects, particularly before menopause, may produce antibodies against hepatitis B virus e antigen and hepatitis B virus surface antigen at a higher frequency than males with chronic hepatitis B virus infection. The estradiol-Dihydrotestosterone model of prostate cancer (PC) proposes that the first step in the development of most PC and breast cancer (BC) occurs when aromatase converts testosterone to estradiol. (PMID: 17708600  , 17678531  , 17644764  ).|
HMDB0000248::The thyronamines function via some unknown mechanism to inhibit neuronal activity; this plays an important role in the hibernation cycles of mammals. One effect of administering the thyronamines is a severe drop in body temperature. Iodide is actively absorbed from the bloodstream and concentrated in the thyroid follicles. (If there is a deficiency of dietary iodine, the thyroid enlarges in an attempt to trap more iodine, resulting in goitre.) Via a reaction with the enzyme thyroperoxidase, iodine is covalently bound to tyrosine residues in the thyroglobulin molecules, forming monoiodotyrosine (MIT) and diiodotyrosine (DIT). Linking two moieties of DIT produces thyroxine. Combining one particle of MIT and one particle of DIT produces triiodothyronine. Both T3 and T4 are used to treat thyroid hormone deficiency (hypothyroidism). They are both absorbed well by the gut, so can be given orally. Levothyroxine, the most commonly used synthetic thyroxine form, is a stereoisomer of physiological thyroxine, which is metabolized more slowly and hence usually only needs once-daily administration. Natural desiccated thyroid hormones, which are derived from pig thyroid glands, are a "natural" hypothyroid treatment containing 20% T3 and traces of T2, T1 and calcitonin. this plays an important role in the hibernation cycles of mammals. One effect of administering the thyronamines is a severe drop in body temperature. The major hormone derived from the thyroid gland. Thyroxine is synthesized via the iodination of tyrosines (monoiodotyrosine) and the coupling of iodotyrosines (diiodotyrosine) in the thyroglobulin. Thyroxine is released from thyroglobulin by proteolysis and secreted into the blood. Thyroxine is peripherally deiodinated to form triiodothyronine which exerts a broad spectrum of stimulatory effects on cell metabolism. The thyronamines function via some unknown mechanism to inhibit neuronal activity.|
HMDB0003550::The major circulating metabolite of vitamin D3 (calciferon). It is produced in the liver and is the best indicator of the body's vitamin D stores. It is effective in the treatment of rickets and osteomalacia, both in azotemic and non-azotemic patients. Calcifediol also has mineralizing properties.|
HMDB0000492::Under standard conditions, chlorine exists as a diatomic molecule. Chlorine is a highly toxic, pale yellow-green gas that has a specific strong smell. In nature, chlorine is most abundant as a chloride ion. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. The chloride ion is an essential anion that the body needs for many critical functions. It also helps keep the body's acid-base balance. The amount of chloride in the blood is carefully controlled by the kidneys. Chloride ions have important physiological roles. For instance, in the central nervous system, the inhibitory action of glycine and some of the action of GABA relies on the entry of Cl- into specific neurons. Also, the chloride-bicarbonate exchanger biological transport protein relies on the chloride ion to increase the blood's capacity of carbon dioxide, in the form of the bicarbonate ion. Chloride-transporting proteins (CLC) play fundamental roles in many tissues in the plasma membrane as well as in intracellular membranes. CLC proteins form a gene family that comprises nine members in mammals, at least four of which are involved in human genetic diseases. GABA(A) receptors are pentameric complexes that function as ligand-gated chloride ion channels. WNK kinases are a family of serine-threonine kinases that have been shown to play an essential role in the regulation of electrolyte homeostasis, and they are found in diverse epithelia throughout the body that are involved in chloride ion flux. Cystic fibrosis (CF) is caused by alterations in the CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTCR) gene that result in deranged sodium and chloride ion transport channels. (PMID: 17539703  , 17729441  , 17562499  , 15300163  ) (For a complete review see Evans, Richard B. Chlorine: state of the art. Lung (2005), 183(3), 151-167. PMID: 16078037  ).|
HMDB0000037::Aldosterone is a steroid hormone produced by the adrenal cortex in the adrenal gland to regulate sodium and potassium balance in the blood. Specifically it regulates electrolyte and water balance by increasing the renal retention of sodium and the excretion of potassium. It is synthesized from cholesterol by aldosterone synthase, which is absent in other sections of the adrenal gland. It is the sole endogenous member of the class of mineralocorticoids. Aldosterone increases the permeability of the apical (luminal) membrane of the kidney's collecting ducts to potassium and sodium and activates their basolateral Na+/K+ pumps, stimulating ATP hydrolysis, reabsorbing sodium (Na+) ions and water into the blood, and excreting potassium (K+) ions into the urine.|
HMDB0000253::Pregnenolone is a derivative of cholesterol, the product of cytochrome P450 side-chain cleavage (EC 1.14.15.6, CYP11A1. This reaction consists of three consecutive monooxygenations, a 22-hydroxylation, a 20-hydroxylation, and the cleavage of the C20-C22 bond, yielding pregnenolone. Pregnenolone is the precursor to gonadal steroid hormones and the adrenal corticosteroids. This reaction occurs in steroid hormone-producing tissues such as the adrenal cortex, corpus luteum, and placenta. The most notable difference between the placenta and other steroidogenic tissues is that electron supply to CYP11A1 limits the rate at which cholesterol is converted into pregnenolone in the placenta. The limiting component for electron delivery to CYP11A1 is the concentration of adrenodoxin reductase in the mitochondrial matrix which is insufficient to maintain the adrenodoxin pool in a fully reduced state. Pregnenolone is also a neurosteroid, and is produced in the spinal cord; CYP11A1 is the key enzyme catalyzing the conversion of cholesterol into pregnenolone, the rate-limiting step in the biosynthesis of all classes of steroids, and has been localized in sensory networks of the spinal cord dorsal horn. In the adrenal glomerulosa cell, angiotensin II, one of the major physiological regulators of mineralocorticoid synthesis, appears to affect most of the cholesterol transfer to the mitochondrial outer membrane and many steps in the transport to the inner membrane. Thus, it exerts a powerful control over the use of cholesterol for aldosterone production (PMID: 17222962  , 15823613  , 16632873  , 15134809  ).|
HMDB0002961::Dihydrotestosterone is a potent androgenic metabolite of testosterone. Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) is generated by a 5-alpha reduction of testosterone. Unlike testosterone, DHT cannot be aromatized to estradiol therefore DHT is considered a pure androgenic steroid. -- Pubchem; Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) (INN: androstanolone) is a biologically active metabolite of the hormone testosterone, formed primarily in the prostate gland, testes, hair follicles, and adrenal glands by the enzyme 5-alpha-reductase by means of reducing the alpha 4,5 double-bond. Dihydrotestosterone belongs to the class of compounds called androgens, also commonly called androgenic hormones or testoids. DHT is thought to be approximately 30 times more potent than testosterone because of increased affinity to the androgen receptor. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0000716::L-pipecolic acid is a normal human metabolite present in human blood, where is present as the primary enantiomer of pipecolic acid. L-pipecolic acid is a cyclic imino acid (contains both imino (>C=NH) and carboxyl (-C(=O)-OH) functional groups) produced during the degradation of lysine, accumulates in body fluids of infants with generalized genetic peroxisomal disorders, including Zellweger syndrome (OMIM 214100  ), neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (OMIM 202370  ), and infantile Refsum disease (OMIM 266510  ). L-pipecolic acid levels are also elevated in patients with chronic liver diseases. L-pipecolic acid is the substrate of delta1-piperideine-2-carboxylate reductase (EC 1.5.1.21) in the pathway of lysine degradation (PMID: 2717271  , 8305590  , 1050990  ).|
HMDB0002163::Trihydroxycoprostanoic acid is excreted in the urine of patients with Zellweger syndrome (PMID 7347441  ), a genetic disorder. The oxidation trihydroxycoprostanic acid is deficient in liver homogenates from patients with peroxisomal diseases (PMID 2576087  ). Trihydroxycoprostanoic acid is found to be associated with adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD), which is also an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000801::Phytanic acid (or 3,7,11,15-tetramethylhexadecanoic acid) is a 20-carbon branched-chain fatty acid that humans can obtain through the consumption of dairy products, ruminant animal fats, and certain fish. It is primarily formed by bacterial degradation of chlorophyll in the intestinal tract of ruminants. Unlike most fatty acids, phytanic acid cannot be metabolized by beta-oxidation (because of a methyl group in the beta position). Instead, it undergoes alpha-oxidation in the peroxisome, where it is converted into pristanic acid by the removal of one carbon. Pristanic acid can undergo several rounds of beta-oxidation in the peroxisome to form medium-chain fatty acids that can be converted into carbon dioxide and water in mitochondria. Refsum disease, an autosomal recessive neurological disorder caused by mutations in the PHYH gene, is characterized by having impaired alpha-oxidation activity. Individuals with Refsum disease accumulate large stores of phytanic acid in their blood and tissues. This frequently leads to peripheral polyneuropathy, cerebellar ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa, anosmia, and hearing loss. Therefore, chronically high levels of phytanic acid can be neurotoxic. Phytanic acid's neurotoxicity appears to lie in its ability to initiate astrocyte/neural cell death by activating the mitochondrial route of apoptosis. In particular, phytanic acid can induce the substantial generation of reactive oxygen species in isolated mitochondria as well as in intact cells. It also induces the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria.|
HMDB0000070::Pipecolic acid is a metabolite of lysine found in human physiological fluids such as urine, plasma and CSF. However, it is uncertain if pipecolic acid originates directly from food intake or from mammalian or intestinal bacterial enzyme metabolism. Recent studies suggest that plasma pipecolic acid, particularly the D-isomer, originates mainly from the catabolism of dietary lysine by intestinal bacteria rather than by direct food intake. In classic Zellweger syndrome (a cerebro-hepato-renal genetic disorder, OMIM 214100  ) pipecolic acid accumulate in the plasma of the patients. It is known that plasma pipecolic acid levels are also elevated in patients with chronic liver diseases. Pipecolic acid is moderately elevated in patients with pyridoxine-dependent seizures and might therefore be a possible biochemical marker for selecting candidates for pyridoxine therapy (Plecko et al 2000). Pipecolic acid was also elevated in CSF in these vitamin B6-responsive patients (PMID 12705501  ). Pipecolic acid is found to be associated with adrenoleukodystrophy, infantile Refsum disease, and peroxisomal biogenesis defect, which are also inborn errors of metabolism. Pipecolic acid is a biomarker for the consumption of dried and cooked beans.|
HMDB0002356::X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is a peroxisomal disorder biochemically characterized by the accumulation of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA), particularly hexacosanoic acid (C(26:0)) and tetracosanoic acid (C(24:0)), in tissues and biological fluids. (PMID 16750542  ).|
HMDB0002068::Erucic acid is a monounsaturated omega-9 fatty acid found mainly in the Brassica family of plants such as canola, rapeseed, wallflower seed, mustard seed as well as Brussels spouts and broccoli. Some Brassica cultivars can have up to 40 to 50 percent of their oil recovered as erucic acid. Erucic acid is also known as cis-13-docosenoic acid. The trans isomer is known as brassidic acid. Erucic acid occurs in nature only along with bitter-tasting compounds. Erucic acid has many of the same uses as mineral oils but with the advantage that it is more readily bio-degradable. Its high tolerance to temperature makes it suitable for transmission oil. Its ability to polymerize and dry means it can be - and is - used as a binder for oil paints. Increased levels of eicosenoic acid (20:ln9) and erucic acid (22:1n9) have been found in the red blood cell membranes of autistic subjects with developmental regression (PMID: 16581239  ). Erucic acid is broken down long-chain acyl-coenzyme A (CoA) dehydrogenase, which is produced in the liver. This enzyme breaks this long chain fatty acid into shorter-chain fatty acids. human infants have relatively low amounts of this enzyme and because of this, babies should not be given foods high in erucic acid. Erucic acid is found to be associated with isovaleric acidemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000574::Cysteine is a naturally occurring, sulfur-containing amino acid that is found in most proteins, although only in small quantities. Cysteine is unique amongst the twenty natural amino acids as it contains a thiol group. Thiol groups can undergo oxidation/reduction (redox) reactions; when cysteine is oxidized it can form cystine, which is two cysteine residues joined by a disulfide bond. This reaction is reversible since the reduction of this disulphide bond regenerates two cysteine molecules. The disulphide bonds of cystine are crucial to defining the structures of many proteins. Cysteine is often involved in electron-transfer reactions, and help the enzyme catalyze its reaction. Cysteine is also part of the antioxidant glutathione. N-Acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC) is a form of cysteine where an acetyl group is attached to cysteine's nitrogen atom and is sold as a dietary supplement. Cysteine is named after cystine, which comes from the Greek word kustis meaning bladder (cystine was first isolated from kidney stones). Oxidation of cysteine can produce a disulfide bond with another thiol and further oxidation can produce sulphfinic or sulfonic acids. The cysteine thiol group is also a nucleophile and can undergo addition and substitution reactions. Thiol groups become much more reactive when they are ionized, and cysteine residues in proteins have pKa values close to neutrality, so they are often in their reactive thiolate form in the cell. The thiol group also has a high affinity for heavy metals and proteins containing cysteine will bind metals such as mercury, lead, and cadmium tightly. Due to this ability to undergo redox reactions, cysteine has antioxidant properties.| Cysteine is an important source of sulfur in human metabolism, and although it is classified as a non-essential amino acid, cysteine may be essential for infants, the elderly, and individuals with certain metabolic disease or who suffer from malabsorption syndromes. Cysteine may at some point be recognized as an essential or conditionally essential amino acid (Wikipedia). Cysteine is important in energy metabolism. As cystine, it is a structural component of many tissues and hormones. Cysteine has clinical uses ranging from baldness to psoriasis to preventing smoker's hack. In some cases, oral cysteine therapy has proved excellent for treatment of asthmatics, enabling them to stop theophylline and other medications. Cysteine also enhances the effect of topically applied silver, tin, and zinc salts in preventing dental cavities. In the future, cysteine may play a role in the treatment of cobalt toxicity, diabetes, psychosis, cancer, and seizures (http://www.dcnutrition.com/AminoAcids/).|
HMDB0000845::Neopterin is a pteridine derivative present in body fluids; elevated levels result from immune system activation, malignant disease, allograft rejection, and viral infections. (From Stedman, 26th ed) Neopterin also serves as a precursor in the biosynthesis of biopterin.|
HMDB0000098::Xylose or wood sugar is an aldopentose - a monosaccharide containing five carbon atoms and an aldehyde functional group. It has chemical formula C5H10O5 and is 40% as sweet as sucrose. Xylose is found in the embryos of most edible plants. The polysaccharide xylan, which is closely associated with cellulose, consists practically entirely of d-xylose. Corncobs, cottonseed hulls, pecan shells, and straw contain considerable amounts of this sugar. Xylose is also found in mucopolysaccharides of connective tissue and sometimes in the urine. Xylose is the first sugar added to serine or threonine residues during proteoglycan type O-glycosylation. Therefore xylose is involved in the biosythetic pathways of most anionic polysaccharides such as heparan sulphate and chondroitin sulphate. In medicine, xylose is used to test for malabsorption by administering a xylose solution to the patient after fasting. If xylose is detected in the blood and/or urine within the next few hours, it has been absorbed by the intestines. Xylose is said to be one of eight sugars which are essential for human nutrition, the others being galactose, glucose, mannose, N-acetylglucosamine, N-acetylgalactosamine, fucose, and sialic acid. (Wikipedia). Xylose in the urine is a biomarker for the consumption of apples and other fruits.|
HMDB0001396::5 methyltetrahydrofolic acid (5-MTHF) is the most biologically active form of the B-vitamin known as folic acid, also known generically as folate. 5-MTHF functions, in concert with vitamin B12, as a methyl-group donor involved in the conversion of the amino acid homocysteine to methionine. Methyl (CH3) group donation is vital to many bodily processes, including serotonin, melatonin, and DNA synthesis. Therapeutically, 5-MTHF is instrumental in reducing homocysteine levels, preventing neural tube defects, and improving vascular endothelial function. Research on folate supplementation suggests it plays a key role in preventing cervical dysplasia and protecting against neoplasia in ulcerative colitis. Folic acid also shows promise as part of a nutritional protocol to treat vitiligo, and may reduce inflammation of the gingiva. Furthermore, certain neurological, cognitive, and psychiatric presentations may be secondary to folate deficiency. Such presentations include depression, peripheral neuropathy, myelopathy, restless legs syndrome, insomnia, dementia, forgetfulness, irritability, endogenous depression, organic psychosis, and schizophrenia-like syndromes. After ingestion, the process of conversion of folic acid to the metabolically active coenzyme forms is relatively complex. Synthesis of the active forms of folic acid requires several enzymes, adequate liver and intestinal function, and adequate supplies of riboflavin (B2), niacin (B3), pyridoxine (B6), zinc, vitamin C, and serine. After formation of the coenzyme forms of the vitamin in the liver, these metabolically active compounds are secreted into the small intestine with bile (the folate enterohepatic cycle), where they are reabsorbed and distributed to tissues throughout the body.| Human pharmacokinetic studies indicate folic acid has high bioavailability, with large oral doses of folic acid substantially raising plasma levels in healthy subjects in a time and dose dependent manner. Red blood cells (RBCs) appear to be the storage depot for folic acid, as RBC levels remain elevated for periods in excess of 40 days following discontinuation of supplementation. Folic acid is poorly transported to the brain and rapidly cleared from the central nervous system. The primary methods of elimination of absorbed folic acid are fecal (through bile) and urinary. Despite the biochemical complexity of this process, evidence suggests oral supplementation with folic acid increases the body's pool of 5-MTHF in healthy individuals. However, enzyme defects, mal-absorption, digestive system pathology, and liver disease can result in impaired ability to activate folic acid. In fact, some individuals have a severe congenital deficiency of the enzyme Methyl tetrahydrofolate reductase (5-MTHFR), which is needed to convert folic acid to 5-MTHF. Milder forms of this enzyme defect likely interact with dietary folate status to determine risk for some disease conditions. In individuals with a genetic defect of this enzyme (whether mild or severe), supplementation with 5- MTHF might be preferable to folic acid supplementation. (PMID: 17176169  ).|
HMDB0000765::Mannitol is a diuretic and renal diagnostic aid related to sorbitol. It has little significant energy value as it is largely eliminated from the body before any metabolism can take place. It can be used to treat oliguria associated with kidney failure or other manifestations of inadequate renal function and has been used for determination of glomerular filtration rate. Mannitol is also commonly used as a research tool in cell biological studies, usually to control osmolarity. Chemically, mannitol is an alcohol and a sugar, or a polyol; it is similar to xylitol or sorbitol. However, mannitol has a tendency to lose a hydrogen ion in aqueous solutions, which causes the solution to become acidic. For this, it is not uncommon to add a substance to adjust its pH, such as sodium bicarbonate. Mannitol is a non-permeating molecule i.e. it cannot cross biological membranes. Mannitol or hexan-1,2,3,4,5,6-hexol (C6H8(OH)6) is an osmotic diuretic agent and a weak renal vasodilator. It is a sorbitol isomer. Mannitol is found to be associated with cytochrome c oxidase deficiency and ribose-5-phosphate isomerase deficiency, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000232::Quinolinic acid is a metabolite of tryptophan with a possible role in neurodegenerative disorders. Elevated CSF levels of quinolinic acid are correlated with the severity of neuropsychological deficits in patients who have AIDS. Quinolinic acid (QUIN) is a product of tryptophan metabolism that can act as an endogenous brain excitotoxin when released by activated macrophages. (Valle et. al, Brain 127:1047 (2004)).|
HMDB0001198::Leukotriene C4 (LTC4) is a cysteinyl leukotriene (CysLT), a family of potent inflammatory mediators. Eosinophils, one of the principal cell types recruited to and activated at sites of allergic inflammation, is capable of elaborating lipid mediators, including leukotrienes derived from the oxidative metabolism of arachidonic acid (AA). Potentially 'activated' eosinophils may elaborate greater quantities of LTC4, than normal eosinophils. These activated eosinophils thus are 'primed' for enhanced LTC4 generation in response to subsequent stimuli. Some recognized priming stimuli are chemoattractants (e.g., eotaxin, PAF) that may participate in the recruitment of eosinophils to sites of allergic inflammation. The mechanisms by which chemoattractants and other activating cytokines (e.g., interleukin (IL)-5) or extracellular matrix components (e.g., fibronectin) enhance eosinophil eicosanoid formation are pertinent to the functions of these eicosanoids as paracrine mediators of allergic inflammation. Some eosinophil-derived eicosanoids may be active in down-regulating inflammation. It is increasingly likely that eicosanoids synthesized within cells, including eosinophils, may have intracellular (e.g., intracrine) roles in regulating cell functions, in addition to the more recognized activities of eicosanoids as paracrine mediators of inflammation. Acting extracellularly, the cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLTs) LTC4 and its extracellular derivatives, LTD4 and LTE4 are key paracrine mediators pertinent to asthma and allergic diseases. Based on their receptor-mediated capabilities, they can elicit bronchoconstriction, mucous hypersecretion, bronchial hyperresponsiveness, increased microvascular permeability, and additional eosinophil infiltration. Eosinophils are a major source of CysLTs and have been identified as the principal LTC4 synthase expressing cells in bronchial mucosal biopsies of asthmatic subjects. (PMID: 12895596  )|Leukotrienes are eicosanoids. The eicosanoids consist of the prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), leukotrienes (LTs) and lipoxins (LXs). The PGs and TXs are collectively identified as prostanoids. Prostaglandins were originally shown to be synthesized in the prostate gland, thromboxanes from platelets (thrombocytes) and leukotrienes from leukocytes, hence the derivation of their names. All mammalian cells except erythrocytes synthesize eicosanoids. These molecules are extremely potent, able to cause profound physiological effects at very dilute concentrations. All eicosanoids function locally at the site of synthesis, through receptor-mediated G-protein linked signaling pathways.|
HMDB0000039::Butyric acid, a four-carbon fatty acid, is formed in the human colon by bacterial fermentation of carbohydrates (including dietary fiber), and putatively suppresses colorectal cancer (CRC). Butyrate has diverse and apparently paradoxical effects on cellular proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation that may be either pro-neoplastic or anti-neoplastic, depending upon factors such as the level of exposure, availability of other metabolic substrate and the intracellular milieu. In humans, the relationship between luminal butyrate exposure and CRC has been examined only indirectly in case-control studies, by measuring fecal butyrate concentrations, although this may not accurately reflect effective butyrate exposure during carcinogenesis. Perhaps not surprisingly, results of these investigations have been mutually contradictory. The direct effect of butyrate on tumorigenesis has been assessed in a no. of in vivo animal models, which have also yielded conflicting results. In part, this may be explained by methodology: differences in the amount and route of butyrate administration, which are likely to significantly influence delivery of butyrate to the distal colon. (PMID: 16460475  ) Butyric acid is a carboxylic acid found in rancid butter, parmesan cheese, and vomit, and has an unpleasant odor and acrid taste, with a sweetish aftertaste (similar to ether). Butyric acid is a fatty acid occurring in the form of esters in animal fats and plant oils. Interestingly, low-molecular-weight esters of butyric acid, such as methyl butyrate, have mostly pleasant aromas or tastes. As a consequence, they find use as food and perfume additives. Butyrate is produced as end-product of a fermentation process solely performed by obligate anaerobic bacteria.|
HMDB0010345::Aldosterone 18-glucuronide is a natural human metabolite of Aldosterone generated in the liver by UDP glucuonyltransferase. Glucuronidation is used to assist in the excretion of toxic substances, drugs or other substances that cannot be used as an energy source. Glucuronic acid is attached via a glycosidic bond to the substance, and the resulting glucuronide, which has a much higher water solubility than the original substance, is eventually excreted by the kidneys.|
HMDB0000130::Homogentisic acid, also known as melanic acid, is an intermediate in the breakdown or catabolism of tyrosine and phenylalanine. It is generated from the compound p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate through the enzyme p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dehydrogenase. The resulting homogentisic acid is then broken down into 4-maleylacetoacetate via the enzyme homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase. Homogentisic acid is also found in other organisms. For instance, it can found in Arbutus unedo (strawberry-tree) honey, in the bacterial plant pathogen Xanthomonas campestris as well as in the yeast Yarrowia lipolytica where it is associated with the production of brown pigments.| Homogentisic acid can be oxidatively dimerized to form hipposudoric acid, one of the main constituents of the 'blood sweat' of hippopotamuses. When present in sufficiently high levels, homogentisic acid can function as an osteotoxin and a renal toxin. An osteotoxin is a substance that causes damage to bones and/or joints. A renal toxin causes damage to the kidneys. Chronically high levels of homogentisic acid are associated with alkaptonuria (OMIM: 203500  ), an inborn error of metabolism. Alkaptonuria is a rare inherited genetic disorder in which the body cannot process the amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine. It is caused by a mutation in the enzyme homogentisate 1,2-dioxygenase (EC 1.13.11.5), which leads to an accumulation of homogentisic acid in the blood and tissues. Homogentisic acid and its oxidized form benzoquinone acetic acid are excreted in the urine, giving it an unusually dark color. The accumulating homogentisic acid (and benzoquinone acetic acid) causes damage to cartilage (ochronosis, leading to osteoarthritis) and heart valves as well as precipitating as kidney stones and stones in other organs. More specifically, homogentisic acid can be converted to benzoquinone acetic acid (BQA), and the resulting BQA can be readily converted to polymers that resemble the dark skin pigment melanin. These polymers are deposited in the collagen, a connective tissue protein, of particular tissues such as cartilage. This process is called ochronosis (as the tissue looks ochre); ochronotic tissue is stiffened and unusually brittle, impairing its normal function and causing damage. Homogentisic acid is the primary precursor of melanin synthesis in Vibrio cholerae.|
HMDB0000138::Glycocholic acid is an acyl glycine and a bile acid-glycine conjugate. It is a secondary bile acid produced by the action of enzymes existing in the microbial flora of the colonic environment. In hepatocytes, both primary and secondary bile acids undergo amino acid conjugation at the C-24 carboxylic acid on the side chain, and almost all bile acids in the bile duct therefore exist in a glycine conjugated form (PMID:16949895  ). More specifically, glycocholic acid or cholylglycine, is a crystalline bile acid involved in the emulsification of fats. It occurs as a sodium salt in the bile of mammals. Its anion is called glycocholate. As the glycine conjugate of cholic acid, this compound acts as a detergent to solubilize fats for absorption and is itself absorbed (PubChem). Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12.| Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues (PMID: 11316487   , 16037564   , 12576301   , 11907135   ). Glycocholic acid is found to be associated with alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000795::Pristanic acid (2,6,10,14-tetramethylpentadecanoic acid) is a terpenoid acid present at micromolar concentrations in the plasma of healthy individuals. It is also found in the lipids from many sources such as freshwater sponges, krill, earthworms, whales, human milk fat, bovine depot fat, butterfat or Californian petroleum. It is usually present in combination with phytanic acid. In humans, pristanic acid is obtained from two sources: either directly from the diet or as the alpha oxidation product of phytanic acid. At physiological concentrations pristanic acid is a natural ligand for PPARalpha. In liver, pristanic acid is degraded by peroxisomal beta oxidation to propionyl-CoA. Together with phytanic acid, pristanic acid accumulates in several inherited disorders such as Zellweger syndrome. Pristanic acid is a branched chain fatty acid that arises from the breakdown of phytanic acid. It is present at micromolar concentrations in the plasma of healthy individuals. Pristanic acid is normally degraded by peroxisomal beta-oxidation. In patients affected with generalized peroxisomal disorders, degradation of both phytanic acid and pristanic acid is impaired owing to absence of functional peroxisomes. Pristanic acid has been found to activate the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor {alpha} (PPAR{alpha}) in a concentration dependent manner.|
HMDB0000508::Ribitol is a metabolic end product formed by the reduction of ribose in human fibroblasts and erythrocytes (pentitol, sugar alcohol, polyol). Export of ribitol across the cell membrane indicates that can be cleared from the body without metabolic conversion (PMID 15234337  ). Several inborn errors of metabolism with abnormal polyol concentrations in body fluids are known to date, such as ribose-5-phosphate isomerase deficiency. Most of these defects can be diagnosed by the assessment of urinary concentrations of polyols (PMID 16435188  ). Ribitol is normally absent in Breast milk (PMID 16456418  ).|
HMDB0000608::Cobalt has a molecular weight of 58.9 and an atomic number of 27. In the Periodic Table, close to other transition metals, it is situated in group 8, together with rhodium and iridium and it can occur in four oxidation states (0, +2, +3 and +4). The +2 and the ground state are the most common. Cobalt occurs in the minerals cobaltite (Co, Fe) AsS, smaltite (CoAs2), and erythrite Co3(AsO4)2.8H2O, and is often associated with nickel, silver, lead, copper, and iron ores, from which it is most frequently obtained as a by-product.| Depending on the considered species, cobalt has multiple industrial applications including the production of alloys and hard metal, diamond polishing, drying agents, pigments and catalysts. Hard metal or cemented carbide is a powder metallurgical product consisting of hard, wear-resistant carbide particles bound together (cemented) with a ductile metal binder (i.e. metallic Co) by liquid phase sintering. Tungsten carbide (WC) is produced by mixing tungsten powder with pure carbon powder at high temperature; hereafter WC is mixed with Co powder to which paraffin is added as a binder. Depending on specific requirements related to their use, hard metals might additionally contain small quantities of chromium, niobium, molybdenum, titanium, tantalum or vanadium carbides. Inhalation and skin contact are the main occupational exposure routes. Occupational exposure to cobalt may result in adverse health effects in different organs or tissues, including the respiratory tract, the skin, the hemapoietic tissues, the myocardium or the thyroid gland. In addition, teratogenic and carcinogenic effects have been observed in experimental systems and/or in humans. For the general population, the diet constitutes the main route of exposure to cobalt, since it is an essential component of Vitamin B12 (hydroxycolalamin).| Cobalt functions as a co-factor in enzyme catalysed reactions and is involved in the production of erythropoietin, a hormone that stimulates the formation of erythrocytes. This last property of cobalt was applied in the past as a therapy for anaemia. The carcinogenic potential of cobalt and its compounds was evaluated in 1991 by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), which concluded that there was inadequate evidence for carcinogenicity in humans (lung cancer) but sufficient evidence in experimental animal studies. In most experimental studies considered, the routes of exposure were, however, of questionable relevance for cancer risk assessment in humans for example, local sarcomas after intra-muscular injection. The general conclusion was that cobalt and its compounds are possibly carcinogenic to humans (group 2B). Since this evaluation, additional data have been accumulated which generally indicate that, depending on the considered cobalt species, different outcomes regarding toxicity, mutagenicity and carcinogenicity can be observed. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. Co(II) ions are genotoxic in vitro and in vivo, and carcinogenic in rodents. Co metal is genotoxic in vitro. Hard metal dust, of which occupational exposure is linked to an increased lung cancer risk, is proven to be genotoxic in vitro and in vivo. Possibly, production of active oxygen species and/or DNA repair inhibition are mechanisms involved. Given the recently provided proof for in vitro and in vivo genotoxic potential of hard metal dust, the mechanistic evidence of elevated production of active oxygen species and the epidemiological data on increased cancer risk, it may be advisable to consider the possibility of a new evaluation by IARC.(PMID: 14643417  ).|
HMDB0000725::4-Hydroxyproline (hydroxyproline or Hyp) is a major component of the protein collagen. Hydroxyproline is produced by hydroxylation of the amino acid proline and is, therefore, a post-translationally modified amino acid. Hydroxyproline and proline play key roles for collagen stability. In particular, they permit the sharp twisting of the collagen helix. Hydroxyproline is found in few proteins other than collagen. The only other mammalian protein which includes hydroxyproline is elastin. For this reason, hydroxyproline content has been used as an indicator to determine collagen and/or gelatin amount in tissue or biological samples. Increased serum and urine levels of hydroxyproline have been found in Paget's disease (PMID: 436278  ). Hydroxyproline (Hyp) content in biological fluids is used as a parameter of collagen catabolism, especially bone resorption or tissue degradation. Bedridden and elderly individuals show significantly elevated serum levels of hydroxyproline in comparison to normal, active individuals (PMID: 10706420  ). Elevated levels of urinary hydroxyproline are also indicative of muscle damage (PMID: 21988268  ). Increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) are also known to accelerate collagen degradation. Hydroxyproline levels increase in cases of depression and stress (PMID: 21483218  ). 4-Hydroxyproline is found to be associated with Alzheimer's disease, and also hydroxyprolinemia and iminoglycinuria which are both inborn errors of metabolism. 4-Hydroxyproline is also involved in metabolic disorders such as hyperprolinemia type I, hyperornithinemia with gyrate atrophy (HOGA), L-arginine:glycine amidinotransferase deficiency, creatine deficiency, and guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency. A deficiency in ascorbic acid can result in impaired hydroxyproline formation (PubChem). trans-4-Hydroxy-L-proline is a biomarker for the consumption of processed meat.|
HMDB0000177::Histidine is an alpha-amino acid with an imidazole functional group. It is one of the 22 proteinogenic amino acids. Histidine was first isolated by German physician Albrecht Kossel in 1896. Histidine is an essential amino acid in humans and other mammals. It was initially thought that it was only essential for infants, but longer-term studies established that it is also essential for adults. Infants four to six months old require 33 mg/kg of histidine. It is not clear how adults make small amounts of histidine, and dietary sources probably account for most of the histidine in the body. Histidine is a precursor for histamine and carnosine biosynthesis. Inborn errors of histidine metabolism, including histidinemia, maple syrup urine disease, propionic acidemia, and tyrosinemia I, exist and are marked by increased histidine levels in the blood. Elevated blood histidine is accompanied by a wide range of symptoms, from mental and physical retardation to poor intellectual functioning, emotional instability, tremor, ataxia and psychosis. Histidine and other imidazole compounds have anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory and anti-secretory properties (PMID: 9605177  ).| The efficacy of L-histidine in protecting inflamed tissue is attributed to the capacity of the imidazole ring to scavenge reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated by cells during acute inflammatory response (PMID: 9605177  ). Histidine, when administered in therapeutic quantities is able to inhibit cytokines and growth factors involved in cell and tissue damage (US patent 6150392). Histidine in medical therapies has its most promising trials in rheumatoid arthritis where up to 4.5 g daily have been used effectively in severely affected patients. Arthritis patients have been found to have low serum histidine levels, apparently because of very rapid removal of histidine from their blood (PMID: 1079527  ). Other patients besides arthritis patients that have been found to be low in serum histidine are those with chronic renal failure. Urinary levels of histidine are reduced in pediatric patients with pneumonia (PMID: 2084459  ). Asthma patients exhibit increased serum levels of histidine over normal controls (PMID: 23517038  ).  Serum histidine levels are lower and are negatively associated with inflammation and oxidative stress in obese women (PMID: 23361591  ).  Histidine supplementation has been shown to reduce insulin resistance, reduce BMI and fat mass and suppress inflammation and oxidative stress in obese women with metabolic syndrome.  Histidine appears to suppress pro-inflammatory cytokine expression, possibly via the NF-κB pathway, in adipocytes (PMID: 23361591  ). Low plasma concentrations of histidine are associated with protein-energy wasting, inflammation, oxidative stress, and greater mortality in chronic kidney disease patients (PMID: 18541578  ).| Histidine may have many other possible functions because it is the precursor of the ubiquitous neurohormone-neurotransmitter histamine. Histidine increases histamine in the blood and probably in the brain. Low blood histamine with low serum histidine occurs in rheumatoid arthritis patients. Low blood histamine also occurs in some manic, schizophrenic, high copper and hyperactive groups of psychiatric patients. Histidine is a useful therapy in all patients with low histamine levels (http://www.dcnutrition.com ).|
HMDB0000001::One-methylhistidine (1-MHis) is derived mainly from the anserine of dietary flesh sources, especially poultry. The enzyme, carnosinase, splits anserine into b-alanine and 1-MHis. High levels of 1-MHis tend to inhibit the enzyme carnosinase and increase anserine levels. Conversely, genetic variants with deficient carnosinase activity in plasma show increased 1-MHis excretions when they consume a high meat diet. Reduced serum carnosinase activity is also found in patients with Parkinson's disease and multiple sclerosis and patients following a cerebrovascular accident. Vitamin E deficiency can lead to 1-methylhistidinuria from increased oxidative effects in skeletal muscle. 1-Methylhistidine is a biomarker for the consumption of meat, especially red meat.|
HMDB0000479::3-Methylhistidine is a product of peptide bond synthesis and methylation of actin and myosin. The measurement of 3-methylhistidine provides an index of the rate of muscle protein breakdown. 3-Methylhistidine is a biomarker for meat consumption, especially chicken. It is also a biomarker for the consumption of soy products.|
HMDB0000033::Carnosine (beta-alanyl-L-histidine) is found exclusively in animal tissues. It is a dipeptide of the amino acids beta-alanine and histidine. Carnosine has the potential to suppress many of the biochemical changes that accompany ageing (e.g. protein oxidation, glycation, AGE formation, and cross-linking) and associated pathologies (PMID: 16804013  ). It is highly concentrated in muscle and brain tissues. Some autistic patients take it as a dietary supplement and attribute an improvement in their condition to it. Supplemental carnosine may increase corticosterone levels. This may explain the "hyperactivity" seen in autistic subjects at higher doses. Carnosine also exhibits some antioxidant effects. The antioxidant mechanism of carnosine is attributed to its chelating effect against metal ions, superoxide dismutase (SOD)-like activity, and ROS and free radicals scavenging ability (PMID: 16406688  ). Carnosine is a biomarker for the consumption of meat. Carnosine is found to be associated with carnosinuria, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000194::This dipeptide is normally absent from human tissues and body fluids, and its appearance there is an artifact of diet (Proc Soc Pediatr Res 134, 1967.) and serum carnosinase deficiency. (OMIM 212200  ) Anserine is present in the skeletal muscle of birds and certain species of mammals, notably the rabbit, rat, and whale, contains anserine. (Proc Soc Pediatr Res 134, 1967) The methyl group of anserine is added to carnosine by the enzyme S-adenosylmethionine: carnosine N-methyltransferase. (J Biol Chem 237:1207, 1962.). Anserine is a biomarker for the consumption of meat, especially chicken.|
HMDB0000929::Tryptophan is an essential amino acid that is the precursor of both serotonin and melatonin. Melatonin is a hormone that is produced by the pineal gland in animals, which regulates sleep and wakefulness. Serotonin is a brain neurotransmitter, platelet clotting factor, and neurohormone found in organs throughout the body. Metabolism of tryptophan into serotonin requires nutrients such as vitamin B6, niacin, and glutathione. Niacin (also known as vitamin B3) is an important metabolite of tryptophan. It is synthesized via kynurenine and quinolinic acids, which are products of tryptophan degradation. There are a number of conditions or diseases that are characterized tryptophan deficiencies. For instance, fructose malabsorption causes improper absorption of tryptophan in the intestine, which reduces levels of tryptophan in the blood and leads to depression. High corn or other tryptophan-deficient diets can cause pellagra, which is a niacin-tryptophan deficiency disease with symptoms of dermatitis, diarrhea, and dementia. Hartnup's disease is a disorder in which tryptophan and other amino acids are not absorbed properly. Symptoms of Hartnup's disease include skin rashes, difficulty coordinating movements (cerebellar ataxia), and psychiatric symptoms such as depression or psychosis. Tryptophan supplements may be useful for treating Hartnup's. Assessment of tryptophan deficiency is done through studying excretion of tryptophan metabolites in the urine or blood. Blood may be the most sensitive test because the amino acid tryptophan is transported in a unique way.| Increased urination of tryptophan breakdown products (such as kynurenine) correlates with increased tryptophan degradation, which occurs with oral contraception, depression, mental retardation, hypertension, and anxiety states. The requirement for tryptophan and protein decreases with age. The minimum daily requirement for adults is 3 mg/kg/day or about 200 mg a day. There is 400 mg of tryptophan in a cup of wheat germ. A cup of low fat cottage cheese contains 300 mg of tryptophan and chicken and turkey contain up to 600 mg of tryptophan per pound (http://www.dcnutrition.com). Tryptophan plays a role in "feast-induced" drowsiness. Ingestion of a meal rich in carbohydrates triggers the release of insulin. Insulin, in turn, stimulates the uptake of large neutral branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs) into muscle, increasing the ratio of tryptophan to BCAA in the bloodstream. The increased tryptophan ratio reduces competition at the large neutral amino acid transporter (which transports both BCAAs and tryptophan), resulting in greater uptake of tryptophan across the blood-brain barrier into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Once in the CSF, tryptophan is converted into serotonin and the resulting serotonin is further metabolized into melatonin by the pineal gland, which promotes sleep.| Under certain situations, tryptophan can be a neurotoxin and a metabotoxin. A neurotoxin is a compound that causes damage to the brain and nerve tissues. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of tryptophan can be found in glutaric aciduria type I (glutaric acidemia type I or GA1). GA1 is an inherited disorder in which the body is unable to completely break down the amino acids lysine, hydroxylysine, and tryptophan. Babies with glutaric acidemia type I are often born with unusually large heads (macrocephaly). Affected individuals may also have difficulty moving and may experience spasms, jerking, rigidity or decreased muscle tone, and muscle weakness. High levels of tryptophan have also been implicated in eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome (EMS), an incurable and sometimes fatal flu-like neurological condition linked to the ingestion of large amounts of L-tryptophan. The risk of developing EMS increases with larger doses of tryptophan and increasing age. Some research suggests that certain genetic polymorphisms may be related to the development of EMS. The presence of eosinophilia is a core feature of EMS, along with unusually severe myalgia (muscle pain). It is thought that both tryptophan and certain unidentified tryptophan contaminants may contribute to EMS (PMID: 1763543  ). It has also been suggested that excessive tryptophan or elevation of its metabolites could play a role in amplifying some of the pathological features of EMS (PMID: 10721094  ). This pathological damage is further augmented by metabolites of the kynurenine pathway (a tryptophan degradation pathway).|
HMDB0000158::Tyrosine is an essential amino acid that readily passes the blood-brain barrier. Once in the brain, it is a precursor for the neurotransmitters dopamine, norepinephrine and epinephrine, better known as adrenalin. These neurotransmitters are an important part of the body's sympathetic nervous system, and their concentrations in the body and brain are directly dependent upon dietary tyrosine. Tyrosine is not found in large concentrations throughout the body, probably because it is rapidly metabolized. Folic acid, copper and vitamin C are cofactor nutrients of these reactions. Tyrosine is also the precursor for hormones, thyroid, catecholestrogens and the major human pigment, melanin. Tyrosine is an important amino acid in many proteins, peptides and even enkephalins, the body's natural pain reliever. Valine and other branched amino acids, and possibly tryptophan and phenylalanine may reduce tyrosine absorption. A number of genetic errors of tyrosine metabolism occur, such as hawkinsinuria and tyrosinemia I. Most common is the increased amount of tyrosine in the blood of premature infants, which is marked by decreased motor activity, lethargy and poor feeding. Infection and intellectual deficits may occur. Vitamin C supplements reverse the disease. Some adults also develop elevated tyrosine in their blood. This indicates a need for more vitamin C. More tyrosine is needed under stress, and tyrosine supplements prevent the stress-induced depletion of norepinephrine and can cure biochemical depression. However, tyrosine may not be good for psychosis. Many antipsychotic medications apparently function by inhibiting tyrosine metabolism. L-dopa, which is directly used in Parkinson's, is made from tyrosine. Tyrosine, the nutrient, can be used as an adjunct in the treatment of Parkinson's. Peripheral metabolism of tyrosine necessitates large doses of tyrosine, however, compared to L-dopa (http://www.dcnutrition.com).|
HMDB0000181::L-Dopa is the naturally occurring form of dihydroxyphenylalanine and the immediate precursor of dopamine. Unlike dopamine itself, L-Dopa can be taken orally and crosses the blood-brain barrier. It is rapidly taken up by dopaminergic neurons and converted to dopamine. In particular, it is metabolized to dopamine by aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase. Pyridoxal phosphate (vitamin B6) is a required cofactor for this decarboxylation, and may be administered along with levodopa, usually as pyridoxine. L-Dopa is used for the treatment of Parkinsonian disorders and Dopa-Responsive Dystonia and is usually given with agents that inhibit its conversion to dopamine outside of the central nervous system. Peripheral tissue conversion may be the mechanism of the adverse effects of levodopa. It is standard clinical practice to co-administer a peripheral DOPA decarboxylase inhibitor - carbidopa or benserazide - and often a catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT) inhibitor, to prevent synthesis of dopamine in peripheral tissue.|
HMDB0000073::Dopamine is a member of the catecholamine family of neurotransmitters in the brain and is a precursor to epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepinephrine (noradrenaline). Dopamine is synthesized in the body (mainly by nervous tissue and adrenal glands) first by the hydration of the amino acid tyrosine to DOPA by tyrosine hydroxylase and then by the decarboxylation of DOPA by aromatic-L-amino-acid decarboxylase.| Dopamine is a major transmitter in the extrapyramidal system of the brain, and important in regulating movement. A family of receptors (dopamine receptors) mediates its action, which plays a major role in reward-motivated behaviour. Dopamine has many other functions outside the brain. In blood vessels, dopamine inhibits norepinephrine release and acts as a vasodilator (at normal concentrations); in the kidneys, it increases sodium excretion and urine output; in the pancreas, it reduces insulin production; in the digestive system, it reduces gastrointestinal motility and protects intestinal mucosa; and in the immune system, it reduces the activity of lymphocytes.| Parkinson's disease, a degenerative condition causing tremor and motor impairment, is caused by a loss of dopamine-secreting neurons in an area of the midbrain called the substantia nigra. There is evidence that schizophrenia involves altered levels of dopamine activity, and most antipsychotic drugs used to treat this are dopamine antagonists, which reduce dopamine activity. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, bipolar disorder, and addiction are also characterized by defects in dopamine production or metabolism. It has been suggested that animals derived their dopamine-synthesizing machinery from bacteria via horizontal gene transfer that may have occurred relatively late in evolutionary time. This is perhaps a result of the symbiotic incorporation of bacteria into eukaryotic cells that gave rise to mitochondria. Dopamine is elevated in the urine of people who consume bananas. When present in sufficiently high levels, dopamine can be a neurotoxin and a metabotoxin. A neurotoxin is a compound that disrupts or attacks neural tissue. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of dopamine are associated with neuroblastoma, Costello syndrome, leukemia, phaeochromocytoma, aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency, and Menkes disease (MNK). High levels of dopamine can lead to hyperactivity, insomnia, agitation and anxiety, depression, delusions, excessive salivation, nausea, and digestive problems.|
HMDB0000517::Arginine is an essential amino acid that is physiologically active in the L-form. In mammals, arginine is formally classified as a semi-essential or conditionally essential amino acid, depending on the developmental stage and health status of the individual. Infants are unable to effectively synthesize arginine, making it nutritionally essential for infants. Adults, however, are able to synthesize arginine in the urea cycle. Arginine can be considered to be a basic amino acid as the part of the side chain nearest to the backbone is long, carbon-containing, and hydrophobic, whereas the end of the side chain is a complex guanidinium group. With a pKa of 12.48, the guanidinium group is positively charged in neutral, acidic, and even most basic environments. Because of the conjugation between the double bond and the nitrogen lone pairs, the positive charge is delocalized. This group is able to form multiple H-bonds. L-Arginine is an amino acid that has numerous functions in the body. It helps dispose of ammonia, is used to make compounds such as nitric oxide, creatine, L-glutamate, and L-proline, and it can be converted into glucose and glycogen if needed. In large doses, L-arginine also stimulates the release of the hormones growth hormone and prolactin.| Arginine is a known inducer of mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) and is responsible for inducing protein synthesis through the mTOR pathway. mTOR inhibition by rapamycin partially reduces arginine-induced protein synthesis (PMID: 20841502  ). Catabolic disease states such as sepsis, injury, and cancer cause an increase in arginine utilization, which can exceed normal body production, leading to arginine depletion. Arginine also activates AMP kinase (AMPK) which then stimulates skeletal muscle fatty acid oxidation and muscle glucose uptake, thereby increasing insulin secretion by pancreatic beta-cells (PMID: 21311355  ). Arginine is found in plant and animal proteins, such as dairy products, meat, poultry, fish, and nuts. The ratio of L-arginine to lysine is also important: soy and other plant proteins have more L-arginine than animal sources of protein.|
HMDB0000904::Citrulline is an amino acid made from ornithine and carbamoyl phosphate in one of the central reactions in the urea cycle. It is also produced from arginine as a by-product of the reaction catalyzed by NOS family (NOS). In this reaction, arginine is first oxidized into N(omega)-hydroxyarginine, which is then further oxidized to citrulline concomitant with the release of nitric oxide (EC 1.14.13.39). Citrulline's name is derived from citrullus, the Latin word for watermelon, from which it was first isolated.|
HMDB0000214::L-ornithine, also known as (S)-2,5-diaminopentanoic acid or ornithine is a member of the class of compounds known as L-alpha-amino acids. L-alpha-amino acids are alpha amino acids which have the L-configuration of the alpha-carbon atom. L-ornithine is soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound. It has been claimed that ornithine improves athletic performance, has anabolic effects, has wound-healing effects, and is immuno-enhancing. L-ornithine is abundant in a number of food items such as wild rices, brazil nuts, common oregano, and common grapes. L-ornithine can be found throughout most human tissues; and in most biofluids, some of which include blood, urine, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), sweat, saliva, and feces. Within the cell, L-ornithine is located in the mitochondria and the cytoplasm.| L-ornithine exists in all living species, from bacteria to humans. In humans, L-ornithine is involved in numerous metabolic disorders, some of which include, ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (OTC deficiency), argininemia, and guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency (GAMT deficiency). Moreover, Ornithine is found to be associated with cystinuria, hyperdibasic aminoaciduria I, and lysinuric protein intolerance, which are inborn errors of metabolism. Ornithine is produced in the urea cycle through the cleavage of urea from arginine. It is a central part of the urea cycle, which allows for the disposal of excess nitrogen. L-Ornithine is also a precursor of citrulline and arginine. In order for ornithine produced in the cytosol to be converted to citrulline, it must first cross the inner mitochondrial membrane into the mitochondrial matrix where it is carbamylated by ornithine transcarbamylase. This transfer is mediated by the mitochondrial ornithine transporter (SLC25A15; AF112968; ORNT1). Mutations in the mitochondrial ornithine transporter result in hyperammonemia, hyperornithinemia, homocitrullinuria (HHH) syndrome, a disorder of the urea cycle (PMID: 16256388  ). The pathophysiology of the disease may involve diminished ornithine transport into mitochondria, resulting in ornithine accumulation in the cytoplasm and reduced ability to clear carbamoyl phosphate and ammonia loads (OMIM 838970  ).|
HMDB0000148::Glutamic acid (Glu), also referred to as glutamate (the anion), is one of the 20 proteinogenic amino acids. It is not among the essential amino acids. Glutamate is a key molecule in cellular metabolism. In humans, dietary proteins are broken down by digestion into amino acids, which serves as metabolic fuel or other functional roles in the body.| Glutamate is the most abundant fast excitatory neurotransmitter in the mammalian nervous system. At chemical synapses, glutamate is stored in vesicles. Nerve impulses trigger release of glutamate from the pre-synaptic cell. In the opposing post-synaptic cell, glutamate receptors, such as the NMDA receptor, bind glutamate and are activated. Because of its role in synaptic plasticity, it is believed that glutamic acid is involved in cognitive functions like learning and memory in the brain. Glutamate transporters are found in neuronal and glial membranes. They rapidly remove glutamate from the extracellular space. In brain injury or disease, they can work in reverse and excess glutamate can accumulate outside cells. This process causes calcium ions to enter cells via NMDA receptor channels, leading to neuronal damage and eventual cell death, and is called excitotoxicity. The mechanisms of cell death include: Damage to mitochondria from excessively high intracellular Ca2+. Glu/Ca2+-mediated promotion of transcription factors for pro-apoptotic genes, or downregulation of transcription factors for anti-apoptotic genes. Excitotoxicity due to glutamate occurs as part of the ischemic cascade and is associated with stroke and diseases like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, lathyrism, and Alzheimer's disease. glutamic acid has been implicated in epileptic seizures. Microinjection of glutamic acid into neurons produces spontaneous depolarization around one second apart, and this firing pattern is similar to what is known as paroxysmal depolarizing shift in epileptic attacks. This change in the resting membrane potential at seizure foci could cause spontaneous opening of voltage activated calcium channels, leading to glutamic acid release and further depolarization (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glutamic_acid). Moreover, glutamic acid is found to be associated with N-acetylglutamate synthetase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0003869::In non-diabetic kidney scarring the protein crosslinking enzyme tissue transglutaminase (tTg) has been implicated in the process by the formation of increased epsilon-(gamma-glutamyl)lysine bonds between ECM components in both experimental and human disease. Changes in tTg and epsilon-(gamma-glutamyl)lysine occur in human Diabetic nephropathy as well, the leading cause of chronic kidney failure. (PMID 15292688  ). In Parkinson's disease (PD), conformational changes in the alpha-synuclein monomer precede the formation of Lewy bodies. Both tTG and its substrate-characteristic N(epsilon)-(gamma-glutamyl)-lysine crosslink are increased in PD nigral dopamine neurons. (PMID 15001552  ). Expression of tissue transglutaminase (tTgase) and epsilon-(gamma-glutamyl)-lysine was present in all scarring of the blebs sites, being the main cause of failure in glaucoma filtration surgery. Transglutaminases are calcium-dependent enzymes that catalyze the posttranslational modification of proteins through an acyl transfer reaction between the gamma-carboxamide group of a peptide-bound glutaminyl residue and various amines. Covalent cross-linking using epsilon-(gamma-glutamyl)-lysine bonds is stable and resistant to enzymatic, chemical, and mechanical disruption. (PMID: 16936095  ).|
HMDB0000112::gamma-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) is an inhibitory neurotransmitter found in the nervous systems of widely divergent species, including humans. It is the chief inhibitory neurotransmitter in the vertebrate central nervous system. In vertebrates, GABA acts at inhibitory synapses in the brain. It acts by binding to specific transmembrane receptors in the plasma membrane of both pre- and postsynaptic neurons. This binding causes the opening of ion channels to allow either the flow of negatively-charged chloride ions into the cell or positively-charged potassium ions out of the cell. This will typically result in a negative change in the transmembrane potential, usually causing hyperpolarization. Three general classes of GABA receptor are known (PMID: 10561820  ). These include GABA-A and GABA-C ionotropic receptors, which are ion channels themselves, and GABA-B metabotropic receptors, which are G protein-coupled receptors that open ion channels via intermediaries known as G proteins (PMID: 10561820  ). Activation of the GABA-B receptor by GABA causes neuronal membrane hyperpolarization and a resultant inhibition of neurotransmitter release. In addition to binding sites for GABA, the GABA-A receptor has binding sites for benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and neurosteroids. GABA-A receptors are coupled to chloride ion channels. Therefore, activation of the GABA-A receptor induces increased inward chloride ion flux, resulting in membrane hyperpolarization and neuronal inhibition (PMID: 10561820  ). After release into the synapse, free GABA that does not bind to either the GABA-A or GABA-B receptor complexes can be taken up by neurons and glial cells.| Four different GABA membrane transporter proteins (GAT-1, GAT-2, GAT-3, and BGT-1), which differ in their distribution in the CNS, are believed to mediate the uptake of synaptic GABA into neurons and glial cells. The GABA-A receptor subtype regulates neuronal excitability and rapid changes in fear arousal, such as anxiety, panic, and the acute stress response (PMID: 10561820  ). Drugs that stimulate GABA-A receptors, such as the benzodiazepines and barbiturates, have anxiolytic and anti-seizure effects via GABA-A-mediated reduction of neuronal excitability, which effectively raises the seizure threshold. GABA-A antagonists produce convulsions in animals and there is decreased GABA-A receptor binding in a positron emission tomography (PET) study of patients with panic disorder. Neurons that produce GABA as their output are called GABAergic neurons and have chiefly inhibitory action at receptors in the vertebrate. Medium spiny neurons (MSNs) are a typical example of inhibitory CNS GABAergic cells. GABA has been shown to have excitatory roles in the vertebrate, most notably in the developing cortex. Organisms synthesize GABA from glutamate using the enzyme L-glutamic acid decarboxylase and pyridoxal phosphate as a cofactor (PMID: 12467378  ). It is worth noting that this involves converting the principal excitatory neurotransmitter (glutamate) into the principal inhibitory one (GABA).| Drugs that act as agonists of GABA (gamma-Aminobutyric acid) receptors (known as GABA analogs or GABAergic drugs), or increase the available amount of GABA typically have relaxing, anti-anxiety, and anti-convulsive effects. GABA is found to be deficient in cerebrospinal fluid and the brain in many studies of experimental and human epilepsy. Benzodiazepines (such as Valium) are useful in status epilepticus because they act on GABA receptors. GABA increases in the brain after administration of many seizure medications. Hence, GABA is clearly an antiepileptic nutrient. Inhibitors of GAM metabolism can also produce convulsions. Spasticity and involuntary movement syndromes, such as Parkinson's, Friedreich's ataxia, tardive dyskinesia, and Huntington's chorea, are all marked by low GABA when amino acid levels are studied. Trials of 2 to 3 g of GABA given orally have been effective in various epilepsy and spasticity syndromes. Agents that elevate GABA are also useful in lowering hypertension. Three grams orally have been effective in controlling blood pressure. GABA is decreased in various encephalopathies. GABA can reduce appetite and is decreased in hypoglycemics. GABA reduces blood sugar in diabetics. Chronic brain syndromes can also be marked by deficiencies of GABA. Vitamin B6, manganese, taurine, and lysine can increase both GABA synthesis and effects, while aspartic acid and glutamic acid probably inhibit GABA effects. Low plasma GABA has been reported in some depressed patients and may be a useful trait marker for mood disorders.| GABA (gamma-Aminobutyric acid) has an important role in embryonic development, especially facial development, as substantiated by the association of a cleft palate in transgenic mice deficient in GAD67 (glutamate decarboxylase). A recent Japanese population study reported linkage in patients with a nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without a cleft palate and specific GAD67 haplotypes (PMID: 23842532  ). Unusually high levels of GABA (especially in the brain) can be toxic and GABA can function as both a neurotoxin and a metabotoxin. A neurotoxin is a compound that damages the brain and/or nerve tissue. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of GABA are associated with at least five inborn errors of metabolism, including D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria, 4-hydroxybutyric aciduria/succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency, GABA-transaminase deficiency, homocarnosinosis, and hyper beta-alaninemia. Nearly all of these conditions are associated with seizures, hypotonia, intellectual deficits, macrocephaly, encephalopathy, and other serious neurological or neuromuscular problems. Increased levels of GABA seem to alter the function of the GABA-B receptor, which may play a role in the tonic-clonic seizures that are often seen in patients with the above disorders.|
HMDB0000452::L-alpha-Aminobutyric acid, also known as (S)-2-aminobutanoic acid, homoalanine, 2-AABA, ethylglycine, or L-butyrine, is a member of the class of compounds known as L-alpha-amino acids. L-alpha-Amino acids are alpha amino acids which have the L-configuration of the alpha-carbon atom. L-alpha-aminobutyric acid is soluble (in water) and is a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). L-alpha-Aminobutyric acid is a non-proteogenic amino acid that can be found in the human kidney, in liver tissues, and in most biofluids or excreta (e.g. feces, breast milk, urine, and blood). Within the cell, L-alpha-aminobutyric acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm. alpha-Aminobutyric acid is biosynthesized by transaminating oxobutyrate, a metabolite in isoleucine biosynthesis. As a non-proteogenic amino acid, alpha-aminobutyric acid can be used by nonribosomal peptide synthases. One example of a nonribosomal peptide containing alpha-aminobutyric acid is ophthalmic acid, which was first isolated from calf lens. alpha-Aminobutyric acid is a non-essential amino acid that is primarily derived from the catabolism of methionine, threonine, and serine. High protein diets can result in significantly higher alpha-aminobutyrate levels in plasma (PMID: 26227325  ). alpha-Aminobutyric acid is elevated in the plasma of children with Reye's syndrome, tyrosinemia, homocystinuria, nonketotic hyperglycinemia, and ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency (PMID: 420125  ). alpha-Aminobutyric acid is one of the three isomers of aminobutyric acid. The two other are the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and beta-aminobutyric acid (BABA) which is known for inducing plant disease resistance.|
HMDB0000641::Glutamine (Gln) is one of the 20 amino acids encoded by the standard genetic code. In humans it is considered a non-essential amino acid. Structurally, glutamine is similar to the amino acid glutamic acid. However, instead of having a terminal carboxylic acid, it has an amide. Enzymatically, glutamine is formed by replacing a side-chain hydroxyl of glutamic acid with an amine functional group. Glutamine is found in foods high in proteins, such as fish, red meat, beans, and dairy products. Glutamine is often used as a supplement in weightlifting, bodybuilding, endurance and other sports, as well as by those who suffer from muscular cramps or pain, particularly elderly people. The main use of glutamine within the diet of either group is as a means of replenishing the body's stores of amino acids that have been used during exercise or everyday activities. Studies which have looked into problems with excessive consumption of glutamine thus far have proved inconclusive. However, normal supplementation is healthy mainly because glutamine is supposed to be supplemented after prolonged periods of exercise (for example, a workout or exercise in which amino acids are required for use) and replenishes amino acid stores. This is one of the main reasons glutamine is recommended during fasting or for people who suffer from physical trauma, immune deficiencies, or cancer.| There is a significant body of evidence that links glutamine-enriched diets with positive intestinal effects. These include maintenance of gut barrier function, aiding intestinal cell proliferation and differentiation, as well as generally reducing septic morbidity and the symptoms of Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS). The reason for such "cleansing" properties is thought to stem from the fact that the intestinal extraction rate of glutamine is higher than that for other amino acids, and is therefore thought to be the most viable option when attempting to alleviate conditions relating to the gastrointestinal tract. These conditions were discovered after comparing plasma concentration within the gut between glutamine-enriched and non glutamine-enriched diets. However, even though glutamine is thought to have "cleansing" properties and effects, it is unknown to what extent glutamine has clinical benefits, due to the varied concentrations of glutamine in varieties of food. It is also known that glutamine has positive effects in reducing healing time after operations. Hospital waiting times after abdominal surgery are reduced by providing parenteral nutrition regimens containing amounts of glutamine to patients. Clinical trials have revealed that patients on supplementation regimes containing glutamine have improved nitrogen balances, generation of cysteinyl-leukotrienes from polymorphonuclear neutrophil granulocytes and improved lymphocyte recovery and intestinal permeability (in postoperative patients) - in comparison to those who had no glutamine within their dietary regime; all without any side-effects (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/glutamine). L-Glutamine is found to be associated with carbamoyl phosphate synthetase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000721::Glycylproline is an end product of collagen metabolism that is further cleaved by prolidase (EC 3.4.13.9); the resulting proline molecules are recycled into collagen or other proteins. Prolidase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by chronic ulcerative dermatitis, mental retardation, frequent infections and massive urinary excretion of iminodipeptides. The disease has been confirmed to be due to hereditary prolidase deficiency. It has been reported that the activity of the enzyme against glycylproline (Gly-Pro) is almost totally deficient in patients with prolidase deficiency, whereas the activity against other substrates is not so deficient. Some patients with prolidase deficiency have a marked urinary excretion of the iminodipeptide Glycylproline. The urine from patients with pressure sores contains significantly more Glycylproline than the urine from the control (PMID: 16009141  , 7629169  , 1536787  , 10582130  ).|
HMDB0000191::Aspartic acid (Asp, D), also known as aspartate, the name of its anion, is one of the 20 natural proteinogenic amino acids which are the building blocks of proteins. As its name indicates, aspartic acid is the carboxylic acid analog of asparagine. As a neurotransmitter, aspartic acid may provide resistance to fatigue and thus lead to endurance, although the evidence to support this idea is not strong (Wikipedia). Aspartic acid is a nonessential amino acid that is made from glutamic acid by enzymes using vitamin B6. The amino acid has important roles in the urea cycle and DNA metabolism. Aspartic acid is a major excitatory neurotransmitter, which is sometimes found to be increased in epileptic and stroke patients. It is decreased in depressed patients and in patients with brain atrophy. Aspartic acid supplements are being evaluated. Five grams can raise blood levels. Magnesium and zinc may be natural inhibitors of some of the actions of aspartic acid. Aspartic acid, with the amino acid phenylalanine, is a part of a new natural sweetener, aspartame. This sweetener is an advance in artificial sweeteners, and is probably safe in normal doses to all except phenylketonurics. The jury is still out on the long-term effects it has on many brain neurohormones. Aspartic acid may be a significant immunostimulant of the thymus and can protect against some of the damaging effects of radiation. Many claims have been made for the special value of administering aspartic acid in the form of potassium and magnesium salts. Since aspartic acid is relatively nontoxic, studies are now in progress to elucidate its pharmacological and therapeutic roles (http://www.dcnutrition.com/AminoAcids).|
HMDB0000172::Branched chain amino acids (BCAA) are essential amino acids whose carbon structure is marked by a branch point. These three amino acids are critical to human life and are particularly involved in stress, energy and muscle metabolism. BCAA supplementation as therapy, both oral and intravenous, in human health and disease holds great promise. "BCAA" denotes valine, isoleucine and leucine which are branched chain essential amino acids. Despite their structural similarities, the branched amino acids have different metabolic routes, with valine going solely to carbohydrates, leucine solely to fats and isoleucine to both. The different metabolism accounts for different requirements for these essential amino acids in humans: 12 mg/kg, 14 mg/kg and 16 mg/kg of valine, leucine and isoleucine respectively. Furthermore, these amino acids have different deficiency symptoms. Valine deficiency is marked by neurological defects in the brain, while isoleucine deficiency is marked by muscle tremors. BCAA are decreased in patients with liver disease, such as hepatitis, hepatic coma, cirrhosis, extrahepatic biliary atresia or portacaval shunt; aromatic amino acids (AAA)-tyrosine, tryptophan and phenylalanine, as well as methionine-are increased in these conditions. Valine, in particular, has been established as a useful supplemental therapy to the ailing liver. All the BCAA probably compete with AAA for absorption into the brain. Supplemental BCAA with vitamin B6 and zinc help normalize the BCAA:AAA ratio.| Branched chain amino acids (BCAA) are not without side effects. Leucine alone, for example, exacerbates pellagra and can cause psychosis in pellagra patients by increasing excretion of niacin in the urine. Leucine may lower brain serotonin and dopamine. A dose of 3 g of isoleucine added to the niacin regime has cleared leucine-aggravated psychosis in schizophrenic patients. Isoleucine may have potential as an antipsychotic treatment. Leucine is more highly concentrated in foods than other amino acids. A cup of milk contains 800 mg of leucine and only 500 mg of isoleucine and valine. A cup of wheat germ has about 1.6 g of leucine and 1 g of isoleucine and valine. The ratio evens out in eggs and cheese. One egg and an ounce of most cheeses each contain about 400 mg of leucine and 400 mg of valine and isoleucine. The ratio of leucine to other BCAA is greatest in pork, where leucine is 7 to 8 g and the other BCAA together are only 3 to 4 g (http://www.dcnutrition.com). Moreover, L-isoleucine is found to be associated with maple syrup urine disease, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000450::5-Hydroxylysine is a hydroxylated derivative of the amino acid lysine that is present in certain collagens. Hydroxylysine is an amino acid and is most widely known as a component of collagen. A standard amino acid with the R' group consisting of an amino terminated butyl hydrocarbon chain, with a hydroxyl group on the carbon atom before the amino group.|
HMDB0000192::Cystine is an oxidized dimeric form of cysteine. It is formed by linking two cysteine residues via a disulfide bond (Cys-S-S-Cys) between the -SH groups. Cystine is found in high concentrations in digestive enzymes and in the cells of the immune system, skeletal and connective tissues, skin, and hair. Hair and skin are 10-14% cystine. Cystine is the preferred form of cysteine for the synthesis of glutathione in cells involved in the immune system (e.g. macrophages and astrocytes). Lymphocytes and neurons prefer cysteine for glutathione production. Optimizing glutathione levels in macrophages and astrocytes with cystine allows these cells to provide cysteine to lymphocytes and neurons directly upon demand (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0000099::Cystathionine is a dipeptide formed by serine and homocysteine. Cystathioninuria is a prominent manifestation of vitamin-B6 deficiency. The transsulfuration of methionine yields homocysteine, which combines with serine to form cystathionine, the proximate precursor of cysteine through the enzymatic activity of cystathionase. In conditions in which cystathionine gamma-synthase or cystathionase is deficient, for example, there is cystathioninuria. Although cystathionine has not been detected in normal human serum or plasma by most conventional methods, gas chromatographic/mass spectrometric methodology detected a mean concentration of cystathionine in normal human serum of 140 nM, with a range of 65 to 301 nM. Cystathionine concentrations in CSF have been 10, 1, and 0.5 uM, and "not detected". Only traces (i.e., <1 uM) of cystathionine are present in normal CSF.587. Gamma-cystathionase deficiency (also known as Cystathioninuria), which is an autosomal recessive disorder (NIH: 2428), provided the first instance in which, in a human, the major biochemical abnormality due to a defined enzyme defect was clearly shown to be alleviated by administration of large doses of pyridoxine. The response in gamma-cystathionase-deficient patients is not attributable to correction of a preexisting deficiency of this vitamin (OMMBID, Chap. 88).|
HMDB0000883::Valine (abbreviated as Val or V) is an -amino acid with the chemical formula HO2CCH(NH2)CH(CH3)2. It is named after the plant valerian. L-Valine is one of 20 proteinogenic amino acids. Its codons are GUU, GUC, GUA, and GUG. This essential amino acid is classified as nonpolar. Along with leucine and isoleucine, valine is a branched-chain amino acid. Branched chain amino acids (BCAA) are essential amino acids whose carbon structure is marked by a branch point. These three amino acids are critical to human life and are particularly involved in stress, energy and muscle metabolism. BCAA supplementation as therapy, both oral and intravenous, in human health and disease holds great promise. "BCAA" denotes valine, isoleucine and leucine which are branched chain essential amino acids. Despite their structural similarities, the branched amino acids have different metabolic routes, with valine going solely to carbohydrates, leucine solely to fats and isoleucine to both. The different metabolism accounts for different requirements for these essential amino acids in humans: 12 mg/kg, 14 mg/kg and 16 mg/kg of valine, leucine and isoleucine respectively. Furthermore, these amino acids have different deficiency symptoms. Valine deficiency is marked by neurological defects in the brain, while isoleucine deficiency is marked by muscle tremors.| Many types of inborn errors of BCAA (Branched chain amino acids) metabolism exist, and are marked by various abnormalities. The most common form is the maple syrup urine disease, marked by a characteristic urinary odor. Other abnormalities are associated with a wide range of symptoms, such as mental retardation, ataxia, hypoglycemia, spinal muscle atrophy, rash, vomiting and excessive muscle movement. Most forms of BCAA metabolism errors are corrected by dietary restriction of BCAA and at least one form is correctable by supplementation with 10 mg of biotin daily. BCAA are decreased in patients with liver disease, such as hepatitis, hepatic coma, cirrhosis, extrahepatic biliary atresia or portacaval shunt; aromatic amino acids (AAA)â€”tyrosine, tryptophan and phenylalanine, as well as methionineâ€”are increased in these conditions. Valine in particular, has been established as a useful supplemental therapy to the ailing liver. All the BCAA probably compete with AAA for absorption into the brain. Supplemental BCAA with vitamin B6 and zinc help normalize the BCAA:AAA ratio (http://www.dcnutrition.com). In sickle-cell disease, valine substitutes for the hydrophilic amino acid glutamic acid in hemoglobin. Because valine is hydrophobic, the hemoglobin does not fold correctly. Hypervalinemia is another example of an inborn error of metabolism involving Valine. Valine is an essential amino acid, hence it must be ingested, usually as a component of proteins.|
HMDB0000202::Methylmalonic acid is a malonic acid derivative, which is a vital intermediate in the metabolism of fat and protein. In particular, the coenzyme A-linked form of methylmalonic acid, methylmalonyl-CoA, is converted into succinyl-CoA by methylmalonyl-CoA mutase in a reaction that requires vitamin B12 as a cofactor. In this way, methylmalonic acid enters the Krebs cycle and is thus part of one of the anaplerotic reactions. Abnormalities in methylmalonic acid metabolism lead to methylmalonic aciduria. This inborn error of metabolism is attributed to a block in the enzymatic conversion of methylmalonyl CoA to succinyl CoA. Methylmalonic acid is also found to be associated with other inborn errors of metabolism, including cobalamin deficiency, cobalamin malabsorption, malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency, and transcobalamin II deficiency. When present in sufficiently high levels, methylmalonic acid can act as an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of methylmalonic acid are associated with at least 5 inborn errors of metabolism, including Malonyl CoA decarboxylase deficiency, Malonic Aciduria, Methylmalonate Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase Deficiency, Methylmalonic Aciduria and Methylmalonic Aciduria Due to Cobalamin-Related Disorders.| Methylmalonic acid is an organic acid and abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart abnormalities, kidney abnormalities, liver damage, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of the untreated IEMs mentioned above. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures.|
HMDB0001247::Aluminum is a soft, lightweight metal with an appearance ranging from silvery to dull gray, depending on the surface roughness. Data indicate that aluminum contaminates much of the raw material used to manufacture solutions used for intravenous nutritional support of hospitalized and ambulatory patients, and that pharmaceutical manufacturers have only recently obtained the technology necessary to detect aluminum contamination of their products. As a result, aluminum bypassed normal barriers and entered the blood, accumulating in bone, the liver, and the central nervous system with toxic consequences.| Now that the FDA has finally issued a rule governing aluminum contamination in these solutions, manufacturers will need to develop methods to minimize such contamination. Scientists should also realize that when the data they obtain indicate a serious problem in the manufacturing sector, they should be sure that the problem is properly addressed. Physiologically, this metal/element exists as an ion in the body (PMID: 16198633  ). Aluminum acetate is an astringent. An astringent is a chemical that tends to shrink or constrict body tissues, usually locally after topical medicinal application. The shrinkage or constriction is through the osmotic flow of water (or other fluids) away from the area where the astringent was applied. Astringent medicines cause shrinkage of mucous membranes or exposed tissues and are often used internally to check discharge of blood serum or mucous secretions. This can happen with a sore throat, hemorrhages, diarrhea, or with peptic ulcers. Externally applied astringents, which cause mild coagulation of skin proteins, dry, harden, and protect the skin. Acne sufferers are often advised to use astringents if they have oily skin. Astringents also help heal stretch marks and other scars. Mild astringent solutions are used in the relief of such minor skin irritations as those resulting from superficial cuts, allergies, insect bites, or fungal infections such as athlete's foot.|
HMDB0002196::Bismuth is a brittle metal with a white, silver-pink hue. Of all the metals, it is the most naturally diamagnetic, and only mercury has a lower thermal conductivity. It is generally considered to be the last naturally occurring stable, non-radioactive element on the periodic table, although it is actually slightly radioactive, with an extremely long half-life.| Bismuth compounds are used in cosmetics, medicines (as antacids), and in medical procedures. As a result trace levels of bismuth are found in almost all humans. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. The normal concentration of bismuth in blood is between 1 and 15 ug/L, but absorption from oral preparations produces a significant rise. Distribution of bismuth in the organs is largely independent of the compound administered or the route of administration: the concentration in kidney is always highest and the substance is also retained there for a long time. It is bound to a bismuth-metal binding protein in the kidney, the synthesis of which can be induced by the metal itself. Elimination from the body takes place by the urinary and faecal routes, but the exact proportion contributed by each route is still unknown. Elimination from blood displays multicompartment pharmacokinetics, the shortest half life described in humans being 3.5 minutes, and the longest 17 to 22 years. A number of toxic effects have been attributed to bismuth compounds in humans: nephropathy, encephalopathy, osteoarthropathy, gingivitis, stomatitis and colitis. Whether hepatitis is a side effect, however, is open to dispute. Each of these adverse effects is associated with certain bismuth compounds. Bismuth encephalopathy occurred in France as an epidemic of toxicity and was associated with the intake of inorganic salts including bismuth subnitrate, subcarbonate and subgallate. In the prodromal phase patients developed problems in walking, standing or writing, deterioration of memory, changes in behaviour, insomnia and muscle cramps, together with several psychiatric symptoms.|
HMDB0000464::Calcium is essential for the normal growth and maintenance of bones and teeth, and calcium requirements must be met throughout life. Requirements are greatest during periods of growth, such as childhood, during pregnancy and when breast-feeding. Long-term calcium deficiency can lead to osteoporosis, in which the bone deteriorates and there is an increased risk of fractures. Adults need between 1,000 and 1,300 mg of calcium in their daily diet. Calcium is essential for living organisms, particularly in cell physiology, and is the most common metal in many animals. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. Calcium combines with phosphorus to form calcium phosphate in the bones and teeth. It is essential for the normal functioning of nerves and muscles and plays a role in blood coagulation (as factor IV) and in many enzymatic processes. Calcium is an important component of a healthy diet. A deficit can affect bone and tooth formation, while overretention can cause kidney stones. Vitamin D is needed to absorb calcium. Dairy products, such as milk and cheese, are a well-known source of calcium. However, some individuals are allergic to dairy products and even more people, particularly those of non-European descent, are lactose-intolerant, leaving them unable to consume dairy products. Fortunately, many other good sources of calcium exist. These include: seaweeds such as kelp, wakame and hijiki; nuts and seeds (like almonds and sesame); beans; amaranth; collard greens; okra; rutabaga; broccoli; kale; and fortified products such as orange juice and soy milk. Calcium has also been found to assist in the production of lymphatic fluids. Furthermore, calcium is found to be associated with primary hypomagnesemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0003638::Cadmium (group IIB of the periodic table of elements) is a heavy metal. It is not a naturally occurring metal in biological systems. Cadmium poses severe risks to human health. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. Up to this day, it has not been shown that cadmium has any physiological function within the human body. Interest has therefore risen in its biohazardous potential. As first described by Friedrich Stromeyer (Gottingen, Germany) in 1817, cadmium intoxication can lead to kidney, bone, and pulmonary damage. Cadmium is widely used in industrial processes, e.g as an anticorrosive agent, as a stabilizer in PVC products, as a colour pigment, a neutron absorber in nuclear power plants, and in the fabrication of nickel cadmium batteries. Phosphate fertilizers also show a big cadmium load. Although some cadmium containing products can be recycled, a large share of the general cadmium pollution is caused by dumping and incinerating cadmium polluted waste. In Scandinavia for example, cadmium concentration in agricultural soil increases by 0.2 percent per year. Total global emission of cadmium amounts to 7000 t/year. The maximum permissible value for workers according to German law is 15 ug/l. For comparison: Non-smokers show an average cadmium blood concentration of 0.5 ug/l. Basically there are three possible ways of cadmium resorption: Gastrointestinal, pulmonary and dermal. The uptake through the human gastrointestinal is approximately 5 percent of an ingested amount of cadmium, depending on the exact dose and nutritional composition. The major source of inhalative cadmium intoxication is cigarette smoke. The human lung resorbes 40 to 60 percent of the cadmium in tobacco smoke.| Little research has been done on dermal absorption of cadmium. Two mechanisms facilitate cadmium absorption by the skin: binding of a free cadmium ion to sulfhydryl radicals of cysteine in epidermal keratins, or an induction and complexing with metallothionein. Once taken up by the blood, the majority of cadmium is transported bound to proteins, such as Albumin and Metallothionein. The first organ reached after cadmium uptake into the GI-blood is the liver. Here cadmium induces the production of Metallothionein. After consecutive hepatocyte necrosis and apoptosis, Cd-Metallothionein complexes are washed into sinusoidal blood. From here, parts of the absorbed cadmium enter the entero-hepatical cycle via secretion into the biliary tract in form of Cadmium-glutathione conjugates. Enzymatically degraded to cadmium-cysteine complexes in the biliary tree, cadmium reenters the small intestines. The main organ for long-term cadmium accumulation is the kidney. Here the half life period for cadmium is approximately 10 years. A life long intake can therefore lead to a cadmium accumulation in the kidney, consequently resulting in tubulus cell necrosis. The blood concentration of cadmium serves as a reliable indicator for a recent exposition, while the urinary concentration reflects past exposure, body burden and renal accumulation. Excretion of Cadmium takes place via faeces and urine. (PMID: 16961932  ).|
HMDB0004142::Barium is a dense alkaline earth metal that occurs in nature as a divalent cation in combination with other elements. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. In addition to its natural presence in the Earth's crust, and therefore its natural occurrence in most surface waters, barium is also released to the environment via industrial emissions. The residence time of barium in the atmosphere may be up to several days. Barium sulfate exists as a white orthorhombic powder or crystals. Barite, the mineral from which barium sulfate is produced, is a moderately soft crystalline white opaque to transparent mineral. The most important impurities are iron(III) oxide, aluminium oxide, silica, and strontium sulfate.Barium sulfate has a low toxicity and relatively high density of about 4.5 g·cm-3 (and thus opacity to X-rays). For this reason it is used as a radiocontrast agent in X-ray imaging of the digestive system ("barium meals" and "barium enemas"). Lithopone, a pigment that contains barium sulfate and zinc sulfide, is a permanent white that has good covering power, and does not darken when exposed to sulfides. (Wikipedia). Barium hydroxide is strongly alkaline and therefore corrosive. Barium nitrate caused mild skin irritation and severe eye irritation in rabbits. The lack of reports of skin or eye irritation in humans, despite its widespread use, suggests that barium sulfate, often used as a contrast medium, is not a strong irritant. Useful information on the sensitization potential of barium compounds was not identified.| Oral intake from drinking water and food is the most prevalent route of exposure to barium compounds for the general population. For the occupational environment, data from industry in the United Kingdom and predictions made using the Estimation and Assessment of Substance Exposure (EASE) model suggest that exposures can be controlled to less than 10 mg/m3 8 hours time weighted average (total inhalable dust). In some situations, control will be to levels significantly below this value. Short term exposures may be higher than 10 mg/m3 for some tasks.The critical end points in humans for toxicity resulting from exposure to barium and barium compounds appear to be hypertension and renal function. Using a no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) in humans of 0.21 mg barium/kg body weight per day, a tolerable intake value of 0.02 mg/kg body weight per day for barium and barium compounds has been developed in this document.Dissolved barium in aquatic environments may represent a risk to aquatic organisms such as daphnids, but it is apparently of lesser risk to fish and aquatic plants, although data are limited. No adverse effects have been reported in ecological assessments of terrestrial plants or wildlife, although some plants are known to bioaccumulate barium from the soil.(Concise international chemical assessment document 33; http://www.inchem.org/documents/cicads/cicads/cicad33.htm).|
HMDB0000692::Iron is a chemical element with the symbol Fe and atomic number 26. Iron makes up 5% of the Earth's crust and is second in abundance to aluminium among the metals and fourth in abundance among the elements. Physiologically, it. exists as an ion in the body. Iron (as Fe2+, ferrous ion) is a necessary trace element used by all known living organisms. Iron-containing enzymes, usually containing heme prosthetic groups, participate in catalysis of oxidation reactions in biology, and in transport of a number of soluble gases.| Iron is an essential constituent of hemoglobin, cytochrome, and other components of respiratory enzyme systems. Its chief functions are in the transport of oxygen to tissue (hemoglobin) and in cellular oxidation mechanisms. Inorganic iron involved in redox reactions is also found in the iron-sulfur clusters of many enzymes, such as nitrogenase (involved in the synthesis of ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen) and hydrogenase. A class of non-heme iron proteins is responsible for a wide range of functions such as ribonucleotide reductase (reduces ribose to deoxyribose; DNA biosynthesis) and purple acid phosphatase (hydrolysis of phosphate esters). When the body is fighting a bacterial infection, the body sequesters iron inside of cells (mostly stored in the storage molecule ferritin) so that it cannot be used by bacteria. Depletion of iron stores may result in iron-deficiency anemia. Iron is used to build up the blood in anemia. Humans experience iron toxicity above 20 milligrams of iron for every kilogram of weight, and 60 milligrams per kilogram is a lethal dose. Over-consumption of iron, often the result of children eating large quantities of ferrous sulfate tablets intended for adult consumption, is the most common toxicological cause of death in children under six. The DRI lists the Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) for adults as 45 mg/day. For children under fourteen years old the UL is 40 mg/day. Iron is a metal extracted from iron ore, and is almost never found in the free elemental state.|
HMDB0003625::Mercury is a metal that is a liquid at room temperature. Mercury has a long and interesting history deriving from its use in medicine and industry, with the resultant toxicity produced. In high enough doses, all forms of mercury can produce toxicity. The most devastating tragedies related to mercury toxicity in recent history include Minamata Bay and Niagata, Japan in the 1950s, and Iraq in the 1970s. More recent mercury toxicity issues include the extreme toxicity of the dimethylmercury compound noted in 1998, the possible toxicity related to dental amalgams, and the disproved relationship between vaccines and autism related to the presence of the mercury-containing preservative, thimerosal. Hair has been used in many studies as a bioindicator of mercury exposure for human populations. At the time of hair formation, mercury from the blood capillaries penetrates into the hair follicles. As hair grows approximately 1 cm each month, mercury exposure over time is recapitulated in hair strands. Mercury levels in hair closest to the scalp reflect the most recent exposure, while those farthest from the scalp are representative of previous blood concentrations. Sequential analyses of hair mercury have been useful for identifying seasonal variations over time in hair mercury content, which may be the result of seasonal differences in bioavailability of fish and differential consumption of piscivorous and herbivorous fish species. Knowledge of the relation between fish-eating practices and hair mercury levels is particularly important for adequate mitigation strategies. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. Methyl mercury is well absorbed, and because the biological half-life is long, the body burden in humans may reach high levels.| People who frequently eat contaminated seafood can acquire mercury concentrations that are potentially dangerous to the fetus in pregnant women. The dose-response relationships have been extensively studied, and the safe levels of exposure have tended to decline. Individual methyl mercury exposure is usually determined by analysis of mercury in blood and hair. Whilst the clinical features of acute mercury poisoning have been well described, chronic low dose exposure to mercury remains poorly characterised and its potential role in various chronic disease states remains controversial. Low molecular weight thiols, i.e. sulfhydryl containing molecules such as cysteine, are emerging as important factors in the transport and distribution of mercury throughout the body due to the phenomenon of "Molecular Mimicry" and its role in the molecular transport of mercury. Chelation agents such as the dithiols sodium 2,3-dimercaptopropanesulfate (DMPS) and meso-2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) are the treatments of choice for mercury toxicity. Alpha-lipoic acid (ALA), a disulfide, and its metabolite dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA), a dithiol, have also been shown to have chelation properties when used in an appropriate manner. Whilst N-acetyl-cysteine (NAC) and glutathione (GSH) have been recommended in the treatment of mercury toxicity in the past, an examination of available evidence suggests these agents may in fact be counterproductive.| Zinc and selenium have also been shown to exert protective effects against mercury toxicity, most likely mediated by induction of the metal binding proteins metallothionein and selenoprotein-P. Evidence suggests however that the co-administration of selenium and dithiol chelation agents during treatment may also be counter-productive. Finally, the issue of diagnostic testing for chronic, historical or low dose mercury poisoning is considered including an analysis of the influence of ligand interactions and nutritional factors upon the accuracy of "chelation challenge" tests. (PMID: 17448359  , 17408840  , 17193738  ).|
HMDB0000547::Magnesium salts are essential in nutrition, being required for the activity of many enzymes, especially those concerned with oxidative phosphorylation. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. It is a component of both intra- and extracellular fluids and is excreted in the urine and feces. Deficiency causes irritability of the nervous system with tetany, vasodilatation, convulsions, tremors, depression, and psychotic behavior. Magnesium ion in large amounts is an ionic laxative, and magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts) is sometimes used for this purpose. So-called "milk of magnesia" is a water suspension of one of the few insoluble magnesium compounds, magnesium hydroxide; the undissolved particles give rise to its appearance and name. Milk of magnesia is a mild base, and is commonly used as an antacid. Moreover, magnesium is found to be associated with primary hypomagnesemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0001333::Manganese is an essential trace nutrient in all forms of life. Physiologically, it. exists as an ion in the body. It is concentrated in cell mitochondria, mostly in the pituitary gland, liver, pancreas, kidney, and bone, influences the synthesis of mucopolysaccharides, stimulates hepatic synthesis of cholesterol and fatty acids, and is a cofactor in many enzymes, including arginase and alkaline phosphatase in the liver.|
HMDB0001302::Molybdenum is a transition metal with the atomic symbol Mo, atomic number 42, and atomic weight 95.94. The pure metal is silvery white in color, fairly soft, and has one of the highest melting points of all pure elements. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. It is an essential trace element, being a component of the enzymes xanthine oxidase, aldehyde oxidase, and nitrate reductase. There is a trace requirement for molybdenum in plants, and soils can be barren due to molybdenum deficiencies. Plants and animals generally have molybdenum present in amounts of a few parts per million. In animals molybdenum is a cofactor of the enzyme xanthine oxidase which is involved in the pathways of purine degradation and formation of uric acid. In some animals, adding a small amount of dietary molybdenum enhances growth.| Francis Crick suggested that since molybdenum is an essential trace element that plays an important role in many enzymatic reactions, despite being less abundant than the more common elements, such as chromium and nickel, that perhaps this fact is indicative of "Panspermia." Crick theorized that if it could be shown that the elements represented in terrestrial living organisms correlate closely with those that are abundant in some class of star - molybdenum stars, for example, that this would provide evidence of such Directed Panspermia. In small quantities, molybdenum is effective at hardening steel. Molybdenum is important in plant nutrition, and is found in certain enzymes, including xanthine oxidase. Molybdenum is used to this day in high-strength alloys and in high-temperature steels. Special molybdenum-containing alloys, such as the Hastelloys, are notably heat-resistant and corrosion-resistant. Molybdenum is used in oil pipelines, aircraft and missile parts, and in filaments. Molybdenum finds use as a catalyst in the petroleum industry, especially in catalysts for removing organic sulfurs from petroleum products. It is used to form the anode in some x-ray tubes, particularly in mammography applications. And is found in some electronic applications as the conductive metal layers in thin-film transistors (TFTs). Molybdenum disulfide is a good lubricant, especially at high temperatures. And Mo-99 is used in the nuclear isotope industry. Molybdenum pigments range from red-yellow to a bright red orange and are used in paints, inks, plastics, and rubber compounds.|
HMDB0002457::Nickel is a solid, silver-white, hard, malleable transition metal with an atomic number of 28. It resists corrosion even at high temperatures. It is present in many alloys in widespread use, including stainless steels. It may also be present as an impurity in any alloy. Nickel is used in the production of coins, jewellery, and nickel-cadmium batteries, and as a catalyst for the hydrogenation of liquid oils to solid fats such as oleomargarine and vegetable shortening. Nickel-containing dental alloys continue to be used successfully in the provision of various forms of dental care. Many of these alloys have applications in the construction of restorations designed to remain in clinical service for many years, including crowns, fixed bridgework, and removable partial dentures. Furthermore, nickel containing alloys find extensive application in orthodontics, including metallic brackets, arch wires, bands, springs and ligature wires. Many instruments and devises, for example, endodontic instruments also contain nickel. Allergic responses are mediated through the immune system. In a sensitized individual, allergic responses can be initiated by relatively small amounts of the allergen; for example, if nickel ions are released from a nickel plated material following direct and prolonged contact with the skin. Individuals are first sensitized to the allergen. Subsequent exposures, if sufficiently high, may then result in an allergic reaction. A number of allergens are used in the clinical practice of dentistry, notably eugenol, mercury, nickel, chromium, cobalt, components of resin-based materials and a host of other chemical agents. The majority of dental allergies, including allergic responses to nickel-containing dental alloys, comprise Type IV hypersensitivity reactions, cell-mediated by T-lymphocytes. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body.(PMID: 17243350  , 16405986  ).|
HMDB0004628::Lead is one of the oldest known and most widely studied occupational and environmental toxins. Despite intensive study, there is still vigorous debate about the toxic effects of lead, both from low level exposure in the general population owing to environmental pollution and historic use of lead in paint and plumbing and from exposure in the occupational setting. The majority of industries historically associated with high lead exposure have made dramatic advances in their control of occupational exposure. However, cases of unacceptably high exposure and even of frank lead poisoning are still seen, predominantly in the demolition and tank cleaning industries. Nevertheless, in most industries blood lead levels have declined below levels at which signs or symptoms are seen and the current focus of attention is on the subclinical effects of exposure. The significance of some of these effects for the overt health of the workers is often the subject of debate. Inevitably there is pressure to reduce lead exposure in the general population and in working environments, but any legislation must be based on a genuine scientific evaluation of the available evidence. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body.| Inorganic lead is undoubtedly one of the oldest occupational toxins and evidence of lead poisoning can be found dating back to Roman times. As industrial lead production started at least 5000 years ago, it is likely that outbreaks of lead poisoning occurred from this time. These episodes of poisoning were not limited to lead workers. The general population could be significantly exposed owing to poorly glazed ceramic ware, the use of lead solder in the food canning industry, high levels of lead in drinking water, the use of lead compounds in paint and cosmetics and by deposition on crops and dust from industrial and motor vehicle sources. It was an important cause of morbidity and mortality during the Industrial Revolution and effective formal control of lead workers did not occur until the pioneering occupational health work of Ronald Lane in 1949. At very high blood lead levels, lead is a powerful abortifacient. At lower levels, it has been associated with miscarriages and low birth weights of infants. Predominantly to protect the developing fetus, legislation for lead workers often includes lower exposure criteria for women of reproductive capacity. Studies have shown a slowing of sensory motor reaction time in male lead workers and some disturbance of cognitive function in workers with blood lead levels >40 ig/100 ml. Peripheral motor neuropathy is seen as a result of chronic high-level lead exposure, but there is conflicting, although on the whole convincing, evidence of a reduction in peripheral nerve conduction velocity at lower blood lead levels. The threshold has been suggested to be as low as 30 ug/100 ml, although other studies have not seen effects below a blood lead level of 70 ug/100 ml.| Several large epidemiological studies of lead workers have found inconclusive evidence of an association between lead exposure and the incidence of cancer. However, based on closer analysis the increase did not appear to be related to lead exposure. There was also a small but significant increase in the incidence of lung cancer, but this could have been the result of confounding from cigarette smoking or concurrent arsenic exposure. There is some evidence in humans that there is an association between low level lead exposure and blood pressure, but the results are inconsistent. Lead appears to reduce the resistance and increase the mortality of experimental animals. It apparently impairs antibody production and decreases immunoglobulin plaque forming cells.| There is some evidence for suggesting that workers with blood lead levels between 20 and 85 ug/100 ml may have an increased susceptibility to colds, but a study of lead workers with blood lead levels less than 50 ug/100 ml showed no significant immunological changes. Although it is widely accepted that personal hygiene is the most important determinant of an individual's blood lead level, recent interesting information has shown that genetic polymorphism may also have an impact. The use of most of these chemicals is declining with the gradual demise of the use of lead in petrol, but lead naphthenates and stearates are still used in stabilizers for plastics and as lead 'soaps'. In fact, the only compound now produced for petrol usage is tetraethyl lead. Exposure is only seen during the production, transportation and blending of this substance into petrol and in workers involved in cleaning storage tanks that have contained leaded petrol. It is in this final group, the tank cleaners, where the highest potential morbidity and mortality may be seen. (PMID: 15020724  ).|
HMDB0005949::Lithium (Li) is an alkali metal. First described as a mood stabilizer in 1949, it remains an efficacious treatment for bipolar disorders. Recent emerging evidence of its neuroprotective and neurogenic effects alludes to lithium's potential therapeutic use in stroke and neurodegenerative diseases. One intriguing clinical application is in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease. Ongoing clinical trials are evaluating lithium's abilities to lower tau and beta-amyloid levels in cerebrospinal fluid in Alzheimer's patients. Lithium reduces brain inositol levels by inhibiting the enzyme inositol monophosphatase. This suggests that inositol monophosphatase inhibition is a key mechanism of Li's therapeutic action and that design of new inositol monophosphatase inhibitors may be a practical strategy to create new compounds with Li-like therapeutic effects. Lithium reduces the severity of some behavioral complications of Alzheimer's disease (AD). And there are growing indications that Li may be of benefit to the underlying pathology of AD, as well as an array of other common CNS disorders, including stroke, Parkinson's disease, and Huntington's disease. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. Despite these demonstrated and prospective therapeutic benefits, Li's mechanism of action remains elusive, and opinions differ regarding the most relevant molecular targets. Lithium inhibits several enzymes; significant among these are inositol monophosphatase (IMPase), glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3), and the proteasome.| Lithium has a narrow therapeutic range, and several well characterised adverse effects limit the potential usefulness of higher doses. Acute ingestion in Li-naive patients is generally associated with only short-lived exposure to high concentrations, due to extensive distribution of Li throughout the total body water compartment. Conversely, chronic toxicity and acute-on-therapeutic ingestion are associated with prolonged exposure to higher tissue concentrations and, therefore, greater toxicity. Lithium toxicity may be life threatening, or result in persistent cognitive and neurological impairment. Therefore, enhanced Li clearance has been explored as a means of minimizing exposure to high tissue concentrations. Although haemodialysis is highly effective in removing circulating Li, serum concentrations often rebound so repeated or prolonged treatment may be required. Continuous arteriovenous haemodiafiltration and continuous venovenous haemodiafiltration increase Li clearance, albeit to a lesser extent than haemodialysis, and are more widely accessible. Lithium reduces brain inositol levels by inhibiting IMPase, suggesting that IMPase's inhibition is a key mechanism of Li's therapeutic action and that design of new IMPase inhibitors may be a practical strategy to create new compounds with Li-like therapeutic effects. (PMID: 17688381  , 17316163  , 8110911  , 17288494  ).|
HMDB0002175::Silicon (Si) is the second most abundant element in the Earth's crust and although there has been interest in the biological role of Si since the beginning of the century, it is only in the last three decades that it has been suggested as an essential trace element. Si may have a role in a number of areas of human physiology and metabolism, especially bone and connective tissue formation, but possibly also gene expression and cardiovascular health. Si is rarely found in its elemental form as it readily reacts with atmospheric O2 and water to produce silicates. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. These vary in composition from simple soluble orthosilicic acid and oligomers through to less soluble colloids and gels, and insoluble solid-phase silicates. The latter constitute the vast majority of environmental silicates (for example, soil minerals), although natural waters contain soluble silicates (mostly orthosilicic acid) generally at 1 to 20 mg/l. Orthosilicic acid is the most readily absorbed form of Si and silicate in man.| Silicon plays an important role in bone mineralization and formation and is therefore incorporated into a wide variety of medical implants and bone grafts used today. Low bone mass (osteoporosis) is a silent epidemic of the 21st century, which presently in the UK results in over 200,000 fractures annually at a cost of over one billion pounds. Figures are set to increase worldwide. Understanding the factors which affect bone metabolism is thus of primary importance in order to establish preventative measures or treatments for this condition. Nutrition is an important determinant of bone health, but the effects of the individual nutrients and minerals, other than calcium, is little understood. Accumulating evidence over the last 30 years strongly suggest that dietary silicon is beneficial to bone and connective tissue health and we recently reported strong positive associations between dietary Si intake and bone mineral density in US and UK cohorts. The exact biological role(s) of silicon in bone health is still not clear, although a number of possible mechanisms have been suggested, including the synthesis of collagen and/or its stabilization, and matrix mineralization.| The field of bioorganosilicon chemistry, which sprung up in the 1970s to exploit the opportunities of silicon for drug design, is currently being developed into a practical and commercial enterprise. Some of the fundamental differences between carbon and silicon can lead to marked alterations in the physicochemical and biological properties of the silicon-containing analogues and the resulting benefits can be exploited in the drug design process. Recent evidence confirms the fundamental involvement of the human immune system in the reaction to implantation of silicone based medical devices. An as yet to be particularized epitope of many complex substances sharing siloxane structures is presented through the MHC-II apparatus with development and retention of T cell memory. This memory can be tested for in practical terms using one or more forms of silica, which links the immuno-histopathology and autoimmune attributes of 'silicosis' with those of 'siliconosis'. The lesions of siliconosis are typical of those for persistent antigens and delayed, cell mediated hypersensitivity. The basic descriptive pathology of the reaction to silicone has been known since soon after introduction of silicones in medical procedures, with the exception of some details related to the more recent discoveries on the role of cytokines in the immunopathic process. The clinical consequences of siliconosis are common and can be severe in some individuals implanted with silicone devices. (PMID: 16277785  , 16632368  , 17435952  , 12821303  , 12951816  , 9951648  ).|
HMDB0001960::Tin is a trace element that is required in bone formation. It has the atomic symbol Sn, atomic number 50, and atomic weight 118.71. (PubChem). Experimental studies over the last decade have suggested an association between thymus immune and homeostatic function and exogenous tin. It has been hypothesized that the thymus gland synthesizes and secretes one or more tin bearing factors that enhance immune defenses against malignancy and retard the gradual loss of immune capacity with senescence. (PMID 2195720  ). Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. Inorganic tin salts are poorly absorbed and rapidly excreted in the faeces; as a result they have a low toxicity. Only about 5 per cent is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, widely distributed in the body, then excreted by the kidney. Some tin is deposited in lung and bone. Some tin salts can cause renal necrosis after parenteral doses. Mutagenic studies on metallic tin and its compounds have been negative. Long-term animal carcinogenic studies have shown fewer malignant tumors in animals exposed to tin than in controls. Human volunteers developed mild signs of toxicity with tin, given in fruit juices, at a concentration of 1400 mg per litre. The WHO 1973 permissible limit for tin in tinned food is 250 micrograms per kg. The adult daily intake of tin was about 17 mg per day in 1940, but it has now decreased to about 3.5 mg, due to improvements in technique of tinning with enamel overcoat and crimped lids to minimize exposure to tin and lead solder. (PMID 3291572  ).|
HMDB0003642::Strontium, also known as SR2+ or strontium ion, belongs to the class of inorganic compounds known as homogeneous alkaline earth metal compounds. These are inorganic compounds containing only metal atoms,with the largest atom being a alkaline earth metal atom. Strontium has been primarily detected in saliva, urine, blood, and cerebrospinal fluid. Outside of the human body, strontium can be found in a number of food items such as pear, green bell pepper, chinese cinnamon, and soy bean. This makes strontium a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0002503::Vanadium is a steel-grey, corrosion-resistant metal, which exists in oxidation states ranging from -1 to +5. Metallic vanadium does not occur in nature, and the most common valence states are +3, +4, and +5. The pentavalent form (VO3-) predominates in extracellular body fluids whereas the quadrivalent form (VO+2) is the most common intracellular form. Because of its hardness and its ability to form alloys, vanadium (i.e., ferrovanadium) is a common component of hard steel alloys used in machines and tools. Although most foods contain low concentrations of vanadium (< 1 ng/g), food is the major source of exposure to vanadium for the general population. High air concentrations of vanadium occur in the occupation setting during boiler-cleaning operations as a result of the presence of vanadium oxides in the dust. The lungs absorb soluble vanadium compounds (V2O5) well, but the absorption of vanadium salts from the gastrointestinal tract is poor. The excretion of vanadium by the kidneys is rapid with a biological half-life of 20-40 hours in the urine. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. Vanadium is probably an essential trace element, but a vanadium-deficiency disease has not been identified in humans. The estimated daily intake of the US population ranges from 10-60 micrograms V. Vanadyl sulfate is a common supplement used to enhance weight training in athletes at doses up to 60 mg/d. In vitro and animal studies indicate that vanadate and other vanadium compounds increase glucose transport activity and improve glucose metabolism.| In general, the toxicity of vanadium compounds is low. Pentavalent compounds are the most toxic and the toxicity of vanadium compounds usually increases as the valence increases. Most of the toxic effects of vanadium compounds result from local irritation of the eyes and upper respiratory tract rather than systemic toxicity. The only clearly documented effect of exposure to vanadium dust is upper respiratory tract irritation characterized by rhinitis, wheezing, nasal hemorrhage, conjunctivitis, cough, sore throat, and chest pain. Case studies have described the onset of asthma after heavy exposure to vanadium compounds, but clinical studies to date have not detected an increased prevalence of asthma in workers exposed to vanadium.| Vanadium is a trace element present in practically all cells in plants and animals. It exerts interesting actions in living systems. At pharmacological doses, vanadium compounds display relevant biological actions such as mimicking insulin and growth factors as well as having osteogenic activity. Some vanadium compounds also show antitumoral properties. The importance of vanadium in bone arises from the studies developed to establish the essentiality of this element in animals and humans. Bone tissue, where the element seems to play an important role, accumulates great amounts of vanadium. Among several metals, vanadium has emerged as an extremely potent agent with insulin-like properties. These insulin-like properties have been demonstrated in isolated cells, tissues, different animal models of type I and type II diabetes as well as a limited number of human subjects. Vanadium treatment has been found to improve abnormalities of carbohydrate and lipid metabolism and of gene expression in rodent models of diabetes. In isolated cells, it enhances glucose transport, glycogen and lipid synthesis, and inhibits gluconeogenesis and lipolysis. The molecular mechanism responsible for the insulin-like effects of vanadium compounds have been shown to involve the activation of several key components of insulin-signaling pathways that include the mitogen-activated-protein kinases (MAPKs) extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and p38MAPK, and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K)/protein kinase B (PKB). (PMID: 16998531  , 16456236  , 10382561  )|
HMDB0001989::Tungsten is a transition metal found, along with chromium, molybdenum and seaborgium, in Group VI of the Periodic Table of elements. Since its discovery in the last quarter of 18th century, tungsten-based products have been in use in a wide range of applications stretching from daily household necessities to highly specialized components of modern science and technology. As new applications and uses are discovered continuously, interest on and demand for tungsten, already an essential commodity, are projected to increase steadily in the years to come. Unavoidably, as is the case with other natural materials and/or non-renewable resources, increased demand and use of tungsten will spawn (a) increased interactions with other materials and/or non-sustainable practices, (b) a greater number of possible entry points into the natural and human environment and (c) a higher probability of deliberate or accidental releases.| Currently, the existing knowledge base does not provide clear information about the behavior of tungsten-based products in the environment. The toxicological profile of tungsten, including possible effects on living organisms and exposure pathways, remains rather sketchy, narrow and fragmentary. Regulation of tungsten, both in terms of environmental and occupational safety and health, is at present limited in comparison with other metals. This pattern of environmental obscurity has been unequivocally disrupted by the events of Fallon, Nevada and the possible implication of tungsten to an acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) cluster. Tungsten is now the focus of scrutiny as it currently occupies the top of 'to do' lists of various regulatory, health and environmental agencies. The occurrence of a childhood leukemia cluster in Fallon, Nevada prompted a wide investigation that involved several local, state and federal agencies led by the Centers of Disease Control (CDC). In essence, the objective of this investigation was to assess whether environmental causes were responsible for the cluster. The 16 reported leukemia cases within the time frame of 1997-2001, were well above the average for Nevada (3.0 cases/100,000 children/5 years). Several possible causes were proposed, such as jet fuel (JP-8) from a nearby military base or from a JP-8 pipeline running through the city, high levels of arsenic and other metals in the drinking water supplies, industrial pollution from a local tungsten smelting facility, and agrochemical contamination resulting from agricultural pesticide/fungicide use. Although the exact causes of leukemia are not well known, genetic and/or environmental factors may trigger the disease including ionizing and electromagnetic radiation, infectious and chemical agents. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body.(PMID: 16343746  ).|
HMDB0002387::Beryllium is a light-weight metallic element, which was first recognized as a lung hazard in Europe in the 1930s, shortly after its first production in modern industry. People exposed to beryllium compounds are at increased risk of developing beryllium sensitization and chronic beryllium disease (CBD). The chronic lung disease was first described among workers exposed to beryllium-containing materials used in the manufacture of fluorescent lamps. In primary production of beryllium metal, which was used in nuclear weapons components, physicians recognized severe dermatitis, reversible pneumonitis, and chronic granulomatous lung disease. Physiologically, this metal/element exists as an ion in the body. It is now recognized that the physicochemical properties of beryllium compounds may account for the differing clinical presentations in different industries. In primary production of beryllium metal, soluble salts are present and cause rashes in approximately one fourth of exposed workers and reversible acute pneumonitis in a smaller portion of the workforce. After heavy inhalation exposures, radiographic abnormalities evolve at approximately three weeks; resolution of symptoms and radiologic abnormalities away from exposure occur only after months, but symptoms recur immediately upon reexposure.| The granulomatous nature of chronic beryllium disease is now known to be caused by cell-mediated sensitization to beryllium. Chronic beryllium disease (CBD) is a granulomatous lung disorder characterized by the accumulation of beryllium-specific CD4(+) T cells. Depending on genetic susceptibility and the nature of the exposure, CBD occurs in up to 20% of exposed workers. Genetic susceptibility has been associated with particular HLA-DP alleles, especially those possessing a negatively charged glutamic acid residue at the 69th position of the beta-chain. The mechanism for this association lies in the ability of these HLA-DP molecules to bind and present beryllium to pathogenic CD4(+) T cells. Large numbers of effector memory, beryllium-specific CD4(+) T cells are recruited to the lung of these subjects and secrete Th1-type cytokines upon beryllium recognition. The presence of circulating beryllium-specific CD4(+) T cells directly correlates with the severity of lymphocytic alveolitis. Since 1987, this biomarker of sensitization has enabled medical surveillance of beryllium-exposed workforces.| Beryllium lymphocyte proliferation tests have been used to screen workers to detect sensitization, to characterize epidemiologically workplace risks for beryllium sensitization, and to evaluate the effectiveness of interventions intended to prevent sensitization. The most compelling real-world example of genetic testing for susceptibility to a workplace exposure involves those industries that process or fabricate beryllium. Under reasonable assumptions, the longitudinal positive predictive value of the HLA-DPB1-Glu69 marker of susceptibility to beryllium disease is 12%. Interpretive challenges further limit the utility of the test and may inadvertently suggest a false sense of safety among workers. Reduction in inhalation exposure to beryllium has not resulted in a concomitant reduction in the occurrence of beryllium sensitization or CBD, suggesting that continued prevalence may be due, in part, to unchecked skin exposure to beryllium-containing particles. (PMID: 17094767  , 16697706  , 16231190  ).|
HMDB0002044::8-hydroxyguanosine (8-OHG) is a marker for measuring the rate of oxidative damage to nucleic acids and lipids. Production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) damage proteins, lipid membranes, and nucleic acids (DNA and RNA), all critical functional components of living cells. The progressive accumulation of unrepaired free radical damage over time is believed to be a major contributor to the aging process and to a variety of age-related chronic diseases. Generation of most free radicals is a 'side effect' of normal metabolic processes, especially mitochondrial production of ROS, including superoxide anion, hydrogen peroxide, and hydroxyl radical, coincident to oxidative metabolism. (PMID 14607529  ). 8-OHG (marker of oxidative damage to RNA) was found in the cerebral cortex in three of six cases of neuropathologically examined autopsy of subacute sclerosing panencephalitis patients. Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis is caused by persistent brain infection of mutated measles virus, showing inflammation, neuronal loss, and demyelination. (PMID 12546425  ). The concentration of 8-OHG in CSF in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients is approximately three-fold that in controls. The concentration of 8-OHG in CSF decreased significantly with the duration of disease. However, the concentration of 8-OHG in serum was not significantly altered in PD patients compared to that in controls. (PMID 12499051  ).|
HMDB0000609::The naturally occurring form of DIHYDROXYPHENYLALANINE and the immediate precursor of DOPAMINE. Unlike dopamine itself, it can be taken orally and crosses the blood-brain barrier. It is rapidly taken up by dopaminergic neurons and converted to DOPAMINE. It is used for the treatment of PARKINSONIAN DISORDERS and is usually given with agents that inhibit its conversion to dopamine outside of the central nervous system.|
HMDB0006284::L-3-Amino-isobutanoic acid is a component of branched-chain amino acid biosynthesis and metabolism. It can also be used in pyrimidine metabolism. L-3-Amino-isobutanoic acid is produced from S-methylmalonate semialdehyde by the enzyme 4-aminobutyrate aminotransferase.|
HMDB0013724::A mercury-thallium alloy, which forms a eutectic at 8.5% thallium, is reported to freeze at -60 C, some 20°C below the freezing point of mercury. This alloy is used in thermometers and low-temperature switches. In organic synthesis thallium(III) salts, as thallium trinitrate or triacetate, are useful reagents performing different transformations in aromatics, ketones, olefins, among others. Thallium is a constituent of the alloy in the anode plates in magnesium seawater batteries. Soluble thallium salts are added to gold plating baths to increase the speed of plating and to reduce grain size within the gold layer. A thallium stress test is a form of scintigraphy, where the amount of thallium in tissues correlates with tissue blood supply. Viable cardiac cells have normal Na+/K+ ion exchange pumps. The Tl+ cation binds the K+ pumps and is transported into the cells. Exercise or dipyridamole induces widening (vasodilation) of normal coronary arteries. This produces coronary steal from areas where arteries are maximally dilated. Areas of infarct or ischemic tissue will remain "cold". Pre- and post-stress thallium may indicate areas which will benefit from myocardial revascularization. Redistribution indicates the existence of coronary steal and the presence of ischemic coronary artery disease. Although thallium is a modestly abundant element in the Earth's crust, with a concentration estimated to be about 0.7 mg/kg, mostly in association with potassium-based minerals in clays, soils, and granites, thallium is not generally economically recoverable from these sources. The major source of thallium for practical purposes is the trace amount that is found in copper, lead, zinc, and other heavy-metal-sulfide ores.| One of the main methods of removing thallium (both radioactive and normal) from humans is to use Prussian blue, which is a material which absorbs thallium. Up to 20 g per day of Prussian blue is fed by mouth to the person, and it passes through their digestive system and comes out in the stool. Hemodialysis and hemoperfusion are also used to remove thallium from the blood serum. At later stage of the treatment additional potassium is used to mobilize thallium from the tissue. Thallium is a chemical element with the symbol Tl and atomic number 81. This soft gray poor metal resembles tin but discolors when exposed to air. Chemists William Crookes and Claude-Auguste Lamy discovered thallium independently in 1861 by the newly developed method of flame spectroscopy. Each discovered the new element in residues of sulfuric acid production. Thallium and its compounds are extremely toxic, and should be handled with great care. There are numerous recorded cases of fatal thallium poisoning. Contact with skin is dangerous, and adequate ventilation should be provided when melting this metal. Thallium(I) compounds have a high aqueous solubility and are readily absorbed through the skin. Exposure to them should not exceed 0.1 mg per m2 of skin in an 8-hour time-weighted average (40-hour work week).| Thallium is a suspected human carcinogen. For a long time thallium compounds were easily available as rat poison. This fact and that it is water soluble and nearly tasteless led to frequent intoxications caused by accident or criminal intent.| Thallium can also be obtained from the smelting of lead and zinc ores. Manganese nodules found on the ocean floor also contain some thallium, but the collection of these nodules has been and continues to be prohibitively expensive. There is also the potential for damaging the environment of the oceans. In addition, several other thallium minerals, containing 16% to 60% thallium, occur in nature as complexes of sulfides or selenides that primarily contain antimony, arsenic, copper, lead, and/or silver. However, these minerals are rare, and they have had no commercial importance as sources of thallium. The Allchar deposit in southern Macedonia was the only area where thallium was ever actively mined. This deposit still contains a loosely estimated 500 tonnes of thallium, and it is a source for several rare thallium minerals, for example lorandite. The compounds with oxidation state +3 resemble the corresponding aluminium(III) compounds. They are moderately strong oxidizing agents, as illustrated by the reduction potential of +0.72 volts for Tl3+. The thallium(III) oxide is a black solid which decomposes above 800°C, forming the thallium(I) oxide and oxygen. The saturated solution of equal parts of thallium(I) formate (Tl(CHO2)) and thallium(I) malonate (Tl(C3H3O4)) in water is known as Clerici solution. It is a mobile odorless liquid whose color changes from yellowish to clear upon reducing the concentration of the thallium salts. With the density of 4.25 g/cm3 at 20°C, Clerici solution is one of the heaviest aqueous solutions known. It was used in the 20th century for measuring density of minerals by the flotation method, but the use is discontinued due to the high toxicity and corrosiveness of the solution.| The two main oxidation states of thallium are +1 and +3. In the oxidation state +1 most compounds closely resemble the corresponding potassium or silver compounds (the ionic radius of thallium(I) is 1.47 while that of potassium is 1.33 and that of silver is 1.26),[citation needed] which was the reason why thallium was sometimes considered to be an alkali metal in Europe (but not in England) in the years immediately following its discovery.:126 For example, the water-soluble and very basic thallium(I) hydroxide reacts with carbon dioxide forming water-soluble thallium carbonate This carbonate is the only water soluble heavy metal carbonate.[citation needed] The similarity with silver compounds is observed with the halide, oxide, and sulfide compounds. Thallium(I) bromide is a photosensitive yellow compound very similar to the silver bromide, while the black thallium(I) oxide and thallium(I) sulfide are very similar to the silver oxide and silver sulfide.[citation needed]|
HMDB0000121::Folic acid is a member of the vitamin B family that stimulates the hematopoietic system. It is present in the liver and kidney and is found in mushrooms, spinach, yeast, green leaves, and grasses (poaceae). Folic acid, being biochemically inactive, is converted to tetrahydrofolic acid and methyltetrahydrofolate by dihydrofolate reductase. These folic acid congeners are transported across cells by receptor-mediated endocytosis where they are needed to maintain normal erythropoiesis, synthesize purine and thymidylate nucleic acids, interconvert amino acids, methylated tRNA, and generate and use formate. Folic acid is used in the treatment and prevention of folate deficiencies and megaloblastic anemia.|
HMDB0000742::Homocysteine is a sulfur-containing amino acid that arises during methionine metabolism. Although its concentration in plasma is only about 10 micromolar (uM), even moderate hyperhomocysteinemia is associated with increased incidence of cardiovascular disease and Alzheimer's disease. Elevations in plasma homocysteine are commonly found as a result of vitamin deficiencies, polymorphisms of enzymes of methionine metabolism, and renal disease. Pyridoxal, folic acid, riboflavin, and Vitamin B(12) are all required for methionine metabolism, and deficiency of each of these vitamins result in elevated plasma homocysteine. A polymorphism of methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (C677T), which is quite common in most populations with a homozygosity rate of 10-15 %, is associated with moderate hyperhomocysteinemia, especially in the context of marginal folate intake. Plasma homocysteine is inversely related to plasma creatinine in patients with renal disease. This is due to an impairment in homocysteine removal in renal disease. The role of these factors, and of modifiable lifestyle factors, in affecting methionine metabolism and in determining plasma homocysteine levels is discussed. Homocysteine is an independent cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk factor modifiable by nutrition and possibly exercise. Homocysteine was first identified as an important biological compound in 1932 and linked with human disease in 1962 when elevated urinary homocysteine levels were found in children with mental retardation. This condition, called homocysteinuria, was later associated with premature occlusive CVD, even in children. These observations led to research investigating the relationship of elevated homocysteine levels and CVD in a wide variety of populations including middle age and elderly men and women with and without traditional risk factors for CVD (PMID 17136938  , 15630149  ). Moreover, homocysteine is found to be associated with cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency, cystathioninuria, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency, and sulfite oxidase deficiency, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000895::Acetylcholine (ACh) is a neurotransmitter. Acetylcholine in vertebrates is the major transmitter at neuromuscular junctions, autonomic ganglia, parasympathetic effector junctions, a subset of sympathetic effector junctions, and at many sites in the central nervous system. Its physiological and pharmacological effects, metabolism, release, and receptors have been well documented in several species. ACh has been considered an important excitatory neurotransmitter in the carotid body (CB). Various nicotinic and muscarinic ACh receptors are present in both afferent nerve endings and glomus cells. Therefore, ACh can depolarize or hyperpolarize the cell membrane depending on the available receptor type in the vicinity. Binding of ACh to its receptor can create a wide variety of cellular responses including opening cation channels (nicotinic ACh receptor activation), releasing Ca2+ from intracellular storage sites (via muscarinic ACh receptors), and modulating activities of K+ and Ca2+ channels. Interactions between ACh and other neurotransmitters (dopamine, adenosine, nitric oxide) have been known, and they may induce complicated responses. Cholinergic biology in the CB differs among species and even within the same species due to different genetic composition.| Development and environment influence cholinergic biology. Pharmacological data clearly indicate that both muscarinic and nicotinic acetylcholine receptors have a role in the encoding of new memories. Localized lesions and antagonist infusions demonstrate the anatomical locus of these cholinergic effects, and computational modeling links the function of cholinergic modulation to specific cellular effects within these regions. Acetylcholine has been shown to increase the strength of afferent input relative to feedback, to contribute to theta rhythm oscillations, activate intrinsic mechanisms for persistent spiking, and increase the modification of synapses. These effects might enhance different types of encoding in different cortical structures. In particular, the effects in entorhinal and perirhinal cortex and hippocampus might be important for encoding new episodic memories. The role of ACh (Acetylcholine) in attention has been repeatedly demonstrated in several tasks. Acetylcholine is linked to response accuracy in voluntary and reflexive attention and also to response speed in reflexive attention. It is well known that those with Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorders tend to be inaccurate and slow to respond. (PMID: 17284361  , 17011181  , 15556286  ).|
HMDB0000086::Glycerophosphorylcholine (GPC) is a choline derivative and one of the two major forms of choline storage (along with phosphocholine) in the cytosol. Glycerophosphorylcholine is also one of the four major organic osmolytes in renal medullary cells, changing their intracellular osmolyte concentration in parallel with extracellular tonicity during cellular osmoadaptation. As an osmolyte, Glycerophosphorylcholine counteracts the effects of urea on enzymes and other macromolecules. Kidneys (especially medullar cells), which are exposed under normal physiological conditions to widely fluctuating extracellular solute concentrations, respond to hypertonic stress by accumulating the organic osmolytes glycerophosphorylcholine (GPC), betaine, myo-inositol, sorbitol and free amino acids. Increased intracellular contents of these osmolytes are achieved by a combination of increased uptake (myo-inositol and betaine) and synthesis (sorbitol, GPC), decreased degradation (GPC) and reduced osmolyte release. GPC is formed in the breakdown of phosphatidylcholine (PtC). This pathway is active in many body tissues, including mammary tissue.|
HMDB0001419::24-Hydroxycholesterol (24OHC) is almost exclusively formed in the brain. The enzymatic conversion of CNS cholesterol to 24OHC, which readily crosses the blood-brain barrier, is the major pathway for brain cholesterol elimination and brain cholesterol homeostasis maintenance. The enzyme mediating this conversion has been characterized at the molecular level as cholesterol 24-hydroxylase (EC 1.14.13.98, CYP46) and is mainly located in neurons. Like other oxysterols, 24OHC is efficiently converted into normal bile acids or excreted in bile in its sulfated and glucuronidated form. Levels of 24OHC in the circulation decrease with age in infants and children. In adults, however, the levels appear to be stable. There is accumulating evidence pointing toward a potentially important link between cholesterol, beta-amyloid, and Alzheimer's disease. Patients with active demyelinating diseases had increased levels of 24OHC in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Patients with Alzheimer's disease have slightly increased levels of 24OHC in CSF. Patients with multiple sclerosis have a tendency to have higher levels of 24OHC during active periods. (PMID: 15061359  , 14574622  ). 24-Hydroxycholesterol has been found to accumulate in hereditary hypercholesterolemia, an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0002103::27-Hydroxycholesterol (27-HC), also known as (25R)-cholest-5-ene-3β,26-diol or by its conventional name 26-hydroxycholesterol, is an oxygenated derivative of cholesterol and a major oxysterol in circulation (PMID: 7749852  ). 27-Hydroxycholesterol is the product of the enzyme sterol 27-hydroxylase. The enzyme is critical for the degradation of the steroid side-chain and a genetic deficiency of the enzyme leads to reduced formation of bile acids in humans. There is a correlation between 27-hydroxycholesterol and cholesterol in the circulation, and females have lower levels of 27-hydroxycholesterol than males. A strong correlation is observed between circulating levels of 27-hydroxycholesterol and cholesterol, in both healthy subjects and subjects with hypercholesterolemia and documented atherosclerosis.| 27-Hydroxycholesterol is metabolized by an oxysterol 7alpha-hydroxylase in the liver. Changes in the activity of this enzyme may lead to the accumulation of 27-hydroxycholesterol in the circulation. It has been reported that patients with a genetic deficiency of oxysterol 7alpha-hydroxylase in the liver had markedly increased levels of 27-hydroxycholesterol in the circulation. However, under normal conditions and in the absence of liver or kidney disease, changes in the levels of 27-hydroxycholesterol in the circulation are likely to be caused by changes in the rate of synthesis of these steroids rather than by the rate of metabolism. There are three possible explanations for the high concentrations of 27-hydroxycholesterol found in the circulation of three subjects with atherosclerosis: (1) increased expression of sterol 27-hydroxylase owing to a genetic factor or some other factor completely unrelated to atherosclerosis, (2) the extrahepatic sterol 27-hydroxylase may be up-regulated by circulating factors (e.g. cytokines) that are directly or indirectly related to the development of atherosclerosis, and (3) the high amounts of cholesterol accumulating in macrophages in some patients with atherosclerosis may result in an increased flux of 27-hydroxycholesterol from the macrophages to the circulation. Since there is a close relation between levels of cholesterol and 27-hydroxycholesterol in the circulation, the possibility must be considered that the flux of 27-hydroxycholesterol into the brain may be part of the yet unexplained link between hypercholesterolemia and Alzheimer's disease.| 27-Hydroxysterol is the most dominant oxysterol in human atheromas where it may reflect a mechanism for eliminating excessive cholesterol, and thus have a protective role. Hypercholesterolemia and chronic low-grade immunological activation are pivotal in the development of atherosclerosis. However, the interconnections between these two factors are not well known. The CD40 system, as measured by the plasma level of soluble CD40 (sCD40), is associated with cholesterol metabolism in hypercholesterolemic patients. When combined, a decreased cholesterol synthesis rate and increased levels of 27-hydroxycholesterol may be a consequence of high levels of cellular cholesterol, and therefore be related to sCD40. However, sCD40 had no significant correlation with total plasma cholesterol. This suggests that the cellular cholesterol synthesis rate and 27-hydroxycholesterol production are more importantly linked with the plasma levels of sCD40 than total cholesterol (PMID: 16081359  , 17012138  , 11504730  , 9144161  ).|
HMDB0001336::3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) is a phenolic acid. DOPAC is a neuronal metabolite of dopamine (DA). DA undergoes monoamine oxidase-catalyzed oxidative deamination to 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde (DOPAL), which is metabolized primarily to DOPAC via aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH2). The biotransformation of DOPAL is critical as previous studies have demonstrated this DA-derived aldehyde to be a reactive electrophile and toxic to dopaminergic cells. Known inhibitors of mitochondrial ALDH2, such as 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4HNE) inhibit ALDH2-mediated oxidation of the endogenous neurotoxin DOPAL. 4HNE is one of the resulting products of oxidative stress, thus linking oxidative stress to the uncontrolled production of an endogenous neurotoxin relevant to Parkinson's disease. In early onset Parkinson disease there is markedly reduced activities of both monoamine oxidase (MAO) A and B. The amount of DOPAC, which is produced during dopamine oxidation by MAO, is greatly reduced as a result of increased parkin overexpression. Administration of methamphetamine to animals causes loss of DA terminals in the brain, and significant decreases in Dopamine and dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) in the striata. Renal dopamine produced in the residual tubular units may be enhanced during a sodium challenge, thus behaving appropriately as a compensatory natriuretic hormone; however the renal dopaminergic system in patients afflicted with renal parenchymal disorders should address parameters other than free urinary dopamine, namely the urinary excretion of L-DOPA and metabolites. DOPAC is one of the major phenolic acids formed during human microbial fermentation of tea, citrus, and soy flavonoid supplements. DOPAC exhibits a considerable antiproliferative effect in LNCaP prostate cancer and HCT116 colon cancer cells. The antiproliferative activity of DOPAC may be due to its catechol structure. A similar association of the catechol moiety in the B-ring with antiproliferative activity was demonstrated for flavanones. (PMID: 16956664  , 16455660  , 8561959  , 11369822  , 10443478  , 16365058  ).|
HMDB0004362::4-Hydroxynonenal (HNE), one of the major end products of lipid peroxidation, has been shown to be involved in signal transduction and available evidence suggests that it can affect cell cycle events in a concentration-dependent manner. glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) can modulate the intracellular concentrations of HNE by affecting its generation during lipid peroxidation by reducing hydroperoxides and also by converting it into a glutathione conjugate. Overexpression of the Alpha class GSTs in cells leads to lower steady-state levels of HNE, and these cells acquire resistance to apoptosis induced by lipid peroxidation-causing agents such as H(2)O(2), UVA, superoxide anion, and pro-oxidant xenobiotics, suggesting that signaling for apoptosis by these agents is transduced through HNE. Cells with the capacity to exclude HNE from the intracellular environment at a faster rate are relatively more resistant to apoptosis caused by H(2)O(2), UVA, superoxide anion, and pro-oxidant xenobiotics as well as by HNE, suggesting that HNE may be a common denominator in mechanisms of apoptosis caused by oxidative stress. Transfection of adherent cells with HNE-metabolizing GSTs leads to transformation of these cells due to depletion of HNE. (PMID 15288119  ).|
HMDB0002032::Formation of 8-hydroxyguanine (8-OHG), a mutagenic base which is a marker for OH-mediated DNA damage, requires peroxidase and halides and occurs in the presence of transition metal chelators (DTPA +/- desferrioxamine), and is inhibited by catalase, superoxide dismutase (SOD), and scavengers of hypohalous acids. (PMID 10820020  ). 8-Hydroxyguanine is an oxidative stress marker for diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). (PMID 15977989  ).|
HMDB0003933::Pentosidine is a carbohydrate-derived advanced glycation end products (AGEs) that is considerably elevated in uremic patients. Derived from ribose, a pentose, pentosidine forms fluorescent cross-links between the arginine and lysine residues in collagen. It is formed in a reaction of the amino acids with the Maillard reaction products of ribose. Although it is present only in trace concentrations among tissue proteins, it is useful for assessing cumulative damage to proteins-advanced glycation endproductsThis compound per se has no biological activities but is highly correlated to the levels of precursors of carbonyl compounds, and for this reason is considered a reliable surrogate marker for AGEs. The modification of proteins in uremia is not limited to AGEs, since advanced lipoxidation end products are also demonstrable in plasma proteins in uremia. The accumulation of these compounds does not seem to be dependent only on the decline of renal function. Carbonyl precursors of AGEs and advanced lipoxidation end products are markedly elevated in uremic patients. Preliminary cross-sectional studies in haemodialysis patients seem to indicate that the AGEs and carbonyl stress may be involved in the pathogenesis of alterations in left ventricular geometry and function in these patients. (PMID 11051031  ). The plasma pentosidine level in diabetic nephropathy was found to be determined by factors such as renal function control of glucose and the patient's age; of these, renal function was the most critical factor.| The pathological role of AGEs (advanced glycation end products) in diabetic nephropathy, is in the expanded mesangial area of diffuse diabetic glomerulosclerosis, with nodular lesions, characteristic of diabetic nephropathy. These suggests a potential link of AGEs accumulation, which may be determined by renal function, control of glucose and age, to renal tissue damage in diabetic nephropathy. (PMID 9044316  ). The rate of accumulation of glycoxidation products is accelerated in diabetes and age-adjusted concentrations of two advanced glycation end-products (AGE) in tissue proteins, N(6)-carboxymethyllysine and pentosidine, correlate with the severity of complication in diabetic patients. (PMID 9044306  ).|
HMDB0000211::myo-Inositol is an inositol isoform. Inositol is a derivative of cyclohexane with six hydroxyl groups, making it a polyol. It also is known as a sugar alcohol, having exactly the same molecular formula as glucose or other hexoses. Inositol exists in nine possible stereoisomers, of which cis-1,2,3,5-trans-4,6-cyclohexanehexol, or myo-inositol is the most widely occurring form in nature. The other known inositols include scyllo-inositol, muco-inositol, D-chiro-inositol, L-chiro-inositol, neo-inositol, allo-inositol, epi-inositol and cis-inositol. myo-Inositol is found naturally in many foods (particularly in cereals with high bran content) and can be used as a sweetner as it has half the sweetness of sucrose (table sugar). myo-Inositol was once considered a member of the vitamin B complex and given the name: vitamin B8. However, because it is produced by the human body from glucose, it is not an essential nutrient, and therefore cannot be called a vitamin. myo-Inositol is a precursor molecule for a number of secondary messengers including various inositol phosphates. In addition, inositol/myo-inositol is an important component of the lipids known as phosphatidylinositol (PI) phosphatidylinositol phosphate (PIP).| myo-Inositol is synthesized from glucose, via glucose-6-phosphate (G-6-P) in two steps. First, G-6-P is isomerised by an inositol-3-phosphate synthase enzyme to myo-inositol 1-phosphate, which is then dephosphorylated by an inositol monophosphatase enzyme to give free myo-inositol. In humans, myo-inositol is primarily synthesized in the kidneys at a rate of a few grams per day. myo-Inositol can be used in the management of preterm babies who have or are at a risk of infant respiratory distress syndrome. It is also used as a treatment for polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). It works by increasing insulin sensitivity, which helps to improve ovarian function and reduce hyperandrogenism. Reduced levels of myo-inositol have been found in the spinal fluid of depressed patients and levels are significantly reduced in brain samples of suicide victims.|
HMDB0001565::Phosphorylcholine is a small haptenic molecule, is found in a wide variety of organisms. Human hepatic tumors undergo an elevation in the concentration of phosphorylcholine as the principal metabolic change is observed (PMID: 11076016  ). Phosphorylcholine is the precursor metabolite of choline in the glycine, serine and threonine metabolism pathways (KEGG, map00260) and in intermediate between choline and cytidine-diphosphate choline in the glycerophospholipid metabolism pathway (KEGG, map00564).|
HMDB0000247::Sorbitol is a polyhydric alcohol with about half the sweetness of sucrose. Sorbitol occurs naturally and is also produced synthetically from glucose. It was formerly used as a diuretic and may still be used as a laxative and in irrigating solutions for some surgical procedures. It is also used in many manufacturing processes, as a pharmaceutical aid, and in several research applications. Ascorbic acid fermentation; in solution form for moisture-conditioning of cosmetic creams and lotions, toothpaste, tobacco, gelatin; bodying agent for paper, textiles, and liquid pharmaceuticals; softener for candy; sugar crystallization inhibitor; surfactants; urethane resins and rigid foams; plasticizer, stabilizer for vinyl resins; food additive (sweetener, humectant, emulsifier, thickener, anticaking agent); dietary supplement. (Hawley's Condensed Chemical Dictionary) Biological Source: Occurs widely in plants ranging from algae to the higher orders. Fruits of the plant family Rosaceae, which include apples, pears, cherries, apricots, contain appreciable amounts. Rich sources are the fruits of the Sorbus and Crataegus species Use/Importance: Used for manufacturing of sorbose, propylene glycol, ascorbic acid, resins, plasticizers and as antifreeze mixtures with glycerol or glycol. Tablet diluent, sweetening agent and humectant, other food uses. Sorbitol is used in photometric determination of Ru(VI) and Ru(VIII); in acid-base titration of borate (Dictionary of Organic Compounds).|
HMDB0001372::Thiamine pyrophosphate is the active form of thiamine, and it serves as a cofactor for several enzymes involved primarily in carbohydrate catabolism. The enzymes are important in the biosynthesis of a number of cell constituents, including neurotransmitters, and for the production of reducing equivalents used in oxidant stress defenses and in biosyntheses and for synthesis of pentoses used as nucleic acid precursors.| The chemical structure of TPP is that of an aromatic methylaminopyrimidine ring, linked via a methylene bridge to a methylthiazolium ring with a pyrophosphate group attached to a hydroxyethyl side chain. In non-enzymatic model studies it has been demonstrated that the thiazolium ring can catalyse reactions which are similar to those of TPP-dependent enzymes but several orders of magnitude slower.| Using infrared and NMR spectrophotometry it has been shown that the dissociation of the proton from C2 of the thiazolium ring is necessary for catalysis; the abstraction of the proton leads to the formation of a carbanion (ylid) with the potential for a nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl group of the substrate. In all TPP-dependent enzymes the abstraction of the proton from the C2 atom is the first step in catalysis, which is followed by a nucleophilic attack of this carbanion on the substrate. Subsequent cleavage of a C-C bond releases the first product with formation of a second carbanion (2-greek small letter alpha-carbanion or enamine). The formation of this 2-greek small letter alpha-carbanion is the second feature of TPP catalysis common to all TPP-dependent enzymes. Depending on the enzyme and the substrate(s), the reaction intermediates and products differ. Methyl-branched fatty acids, as phytanic acid, undergo peroxisomal beta-oxidation in which they are shortened by 1 carbon atom. This process includes four steps: activation, 2-hydroxylation, thiamine pyrophosphate dependent cleavage and aldehyde dehydrogenation. In the third step, 2-hydroxy-3-methylacyl-CoA is cleaved in the peroxisomal matrix by 2-hydroxyphytanoyl-CoA lyase (2-HPCL), which uses thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) as cofactor. The thiamine pyrophosphate dependence of the third step is unique in peroxisomal mammalian enzymology. Human pathology due to a deficient alpha-oxidation is mostly linked to mutations in the gene coding for the second enzyme of the sequence, phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase (EC 1.14.11.18). (PMID: 12694175  , 11899071  , 9924800  ).|
HMDB0002666::Thiamine monophosphate is a thiamine derivative. It is a monophosphate ester of thiamine. Thiamine monophosphate (ThMP) is one of the five known natural thiamine phosphate derivatives. Thiamine (vitamin B1) is the transport form of the vitamin, while the phosphorylated derivatives are the active forms. There is no known physiological role of thiamine monophosphate.|
HMDB0002712::1,5-Anhydrosorbitol or 1,5-anhydroglucitol (1,5-AG) is a validated marker of short-term glycemic control. This substance is derived mainly from food, is well absorbed in the intestine, and is distributed to all organs and tissues. It is metabolically stable, being excreted in the urine when its level exceeds the renal threshold. It is reabsorbed in the renal tubules and is competitively inhibited by glucosuria, which leads to a reduction in its level in serum. The correlation between this reduction and the amount of glucose present in urine is so close that 1,5 AG can be used as a sensitive, day-to-day, real-time marker of glycemic control. It provides useful information on current glycemic control and is superior to both hemoglobin A1C and fructosamine in detecting near-normoglycemia. 1,5-AG in human plasma has been proposed for several years as a short-term, retrospective marker of glycemic control and seems to be the most suitable parameter for monitoring glucose excursions. The decrease in serum 1,5-AG is very sensitive to urinary glucose excretion. It is a metabolically inert polyol that competes with glucose for reabsorption in the kidneys. Otherwise stable levels of 1,5-AG are rapidly depleted as blood glucose levels exceed the renal threshold for glucosuria. 1,5-AG is also more tightly associated with glucose fluctuations and postprandial glucose (PMID: 18088226  , 12166605  , 7783360  , 8940824  ).|
HMDB0001851::L-Arabitol, also known as L-arabinitol or L-lyxitol, is a member of the class of compounds known as sugar alcohols. Sugar alcohols are hydrogenated forms of carbohydrate in which the carbonyl group (aldehyde or ketone reducing sugar) has been reduced to a primary or secondary hydroxyl group. L-Arabitol is soluble (in water) and is a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). L-Arabitol can be found in a number of food items such as sweet potato, deerberry, moth bean, and European chestnut, which makes L-arabitol a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. L-Arabitol can be found in most biofluids, including urine, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), saliva, and blood. L-Arabitol exists in all living species, ranging from bacteria to humans. Moreover, L-arabitol is found to be associated with Alzheimer's disease and ribose-5-phosphate isomerase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism. L-Arabitol can be formed by the reduction of either arabinose or lyxose. L-Arabitol has been reported in pentosuric acidemia (PMID: 13525419  ). L-Arabinosinuia has been described in a patient, presented at the age of 16 months with delayed motor development and facial dysmorphism (PMID: 12359133  ) Congenital liver cirrhosis has been recently described in a patient with highly elevated plasma and urine levels of arabitol due to transaldolase deficiency (Inherit Metab Dis 23(Suppl. 1):172, 2000).|
HMDB0000107::Galactitol or dulcitol is a sugar alcohol that is a metabolic breakdown product of galactose. Galactose is derived from lactose in food (such as dairy products). When lactose is broken down by the enzyme lactase it produces glucose and galactose. Galactitol has a slightly sweet taste. It is produced from galactose in a reaction catalyzed by aldose reductase. When present in sufficiently high levels, galactitol can act as a metabotoxin, a neurotoxin, and a hepatotoxin. A neurotoxin is a compound that disrupts or attacks neural cells and neural tissue. A hepatotoxin as a compound that disrupts or attacks liver tissue or liver cells. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of galactitol are associated with at least two inborn errors of metabolism, including galactosemia and galactosemia type II. Galactosemia is a rare genetic metabolic disorder that affects an individual's ability to metabolize the sugar galactose properly. Excess lactose consumption in individuals with galactose intolerance or galactosemia activates aldose reductase to produce galactitol, thus depleting NADPH and leading to lowered glutathione reductase activity. As a result, hydrogen peroxide or other free radicals accumulate causing serious oxidative damage to various cells and tissues. In individuals with galactosemia, the enzymes needed for the further metabolism of galactose (galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase) are severely diminished or missing entirely, leading to toxic levels of galactose 1-phosphate, galactitol, and galactonate. High levels of galactitol in infants are specifically associated with hepatomegaly (an enlarged liver), cirrhosis, renal failure, cataracts, vomiting, seizure, hypoglycemia, lethargy, brain damage, and ovarian failure.|
HMDB0006695::Prolylhydroxyproline is a dipeptide. Prolylhydroxyproline is a marker of bone collagen degradation, showing high sensitivity for the diagnosis of osteoporosis. Prolylhydroxyproline has been suggested as a possible alternative to hydroxyproline determination in bone resorption studies. Prolylhydroxyproline is one of the iminodipeptides present in the urine of patients with prolidase deficiency. Prolidase (X-Pro dipeptidase EC 3.4. 13.9) splits iminodipeptides containing C-terminal proline or hydroxyproline (X-Pro or X-Hyp) to X+Pro or X+Hyp. Prolidase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by chronic ulcerative dermatitis and mental retardation. These patients excrete large amounts of iminodipeptides containing C-terminal proline in the urine due to hereditary prolidase deficiency. (PMID: 12636053  , 11863289  , 2387877  , 1874885  , 9586797  ).|
HMDB0000097::Choline is a basic constituent of lecithin that is found in many plants and animal organs. It is important as a precursor of acetylcholine, as a methyl donor in various metabolic processes, and in lipid metabolism. Choline is now considered to be an essential vitamin. While humans can synthesize small amounts (by converting phosphatidylethanolamine to phosphatidylcholine), it must be consumed in the diet to maintain health. Required levels are between 425 mg/day (female) and 550 mg/day (male). Milk, eggs, liver, and peanuts are especially rich in choline. Most choline is found in phospholipids, namely phosphatidylcholine or lecithin. Choline can be oxidized to form betaine, which is a methyl source for many reactions (i.e. conversion of homocysteine into methionine). Lack of sufficient amounts of choline in the diet can lead to a fatty liver condition and general liver damage. This arises from the lack of VLDL, which is necessary to transport fats away from the liver. Choline deficiency also leads to elevated serum levels of alanine amino transferase and is associated with increased incidence of liver cancer.|
HMDB0000162::L-proline is one of the twenty amino acids used in living organisms as the building blocks of proteins. Proline is sometimes called an imino acid, although the IUPAC definition of an imine requires a carbon-nitrogen double bond. Proline is a non-essential amino acid that is synthesized from glutamic acid. It is an essential component of collagen and is important for proper functioning of joints and tendons. Proline is derived from the amino acid L-glutamate in which glutamate-5-semialdehyde is first formed by glutamate 5-kinase and glutamate-5-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (which requires NADH or NADPH). This semialdehyde can then either spontaneously cyclize to form 1-pyrroline-5-carboxylic acid, which is reduced to proline by pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase, or turned into ornithine by ornithine aminotransferase, followed by cyclization by ornithine cyclodeaminase to form proline. L-Proline has been found to act as a weak agonist of the glycine receptor and of both NMDA and non-NMDA ionotropic glutamate receptors. It has been proposed to be a potential endogenous excitotoxin/neurotoxin. Studies in rats have shown that when injected into the brain, proline non-selectively destroys pyramidal and granule cells (PMID: 3409032  ). Therefore, under certain conditions proline can act as a neurotoxin and a metabotoxin. A neurotoxin causes damage to nerve cells and nerve tissues. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels.| Chronically high levels of proline are associated with at least five inborn errors of metabolism, including hyperprolinemia type I, hyperprolinemia type II, iminoglycinuria, prolinemia type II, and pyruvate carboxylase deficiency. People with hyperprolinemia type I often do not show any symptoms even though they have proline levels in their blood between 3 and 10 times the normal level. Some individuals with hyperprolinemia type I exhibit seizures, intellectual disability, or other neurological or psychiatric problems. Hyperprolinemia type II results in proline levels in the blood between 10 and 15 times higher than normal, and high levels of a related compound called pyrroline-5-carboxylate. Hyperprolinemia type II has signs and symptoms that vary in severity, and is more likely than type I to involve seizures or intellectual disability.|
HMDB0000168::Asparagine (Asn) is one of the 20 most common natural amino acids on Earth. It has carboxamide as the side chain's functional group. Asparagine is not an essential amino acid, which means that it can be synthesized from central metabolic pathway intermediates in humans and is not required in the diet. The precursor to asparagine is oxaloacetate. Oxaloacetate is converted to aspartate using a transaminase enzyme. The enzyme transfers the amino group from glutamate to oxaloacetate producing alpha-ketoglutarate and aspartate. The enzyme asparagine synthetase produces asparagine, AMP, glutamate, and pyrophosphate from aspartate, glutamine, and ATP. In the asparagine synthetase reaction, ATP is used to activate aspartate, forming beta-aspartyl-AMP. Glutamine donates an ammonium group which reacts with beta-aspartyl-AMP to form asparagine and free AMP. Since the asparagine side chain can make efficient hydrogen bond interactions with the peptide backbone, asparagines are often found near the beginning and end of alpha-helices, and in turn motifs in beta sheets. Its role can be thought as "capping" the hydrogen bond interactions which would otherwise need to be satisfied by the polypeptide backbone. Glutamines have an extra methylene group and have more conformational entropy, and thus are less useful in this regard.| Asparagine also provides key sites for N-linked glycosylation, modification of the protein chain with the addition of carbohydrate chains. A reaction between asparagine and reducing sugars or reactive carbonyls produces acrylamide (acrylic amide) in food when heated to sufficient temperature (i.e. baking). These occur primarily in baked goods such as french fries, potato chips, and roasted coffee. Asparagine was first isolated in 1806 from asparagus juice, in which it is abundant--hence its name--becoming the first amino acid to be isolated. The smell observed in the urine of some individuals after their consumption of asparagus is attributed to a byproduct of the metabolic breakdown of asparagine, asparagine-amino-succinic-acid monoamide. However, some scientists disagree and implicate other substances in the smell, especially methanethiol (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0000687::L-leucine, also known as leu or 2-amino-4-methylvaleric acid, belongs to leucine and derivatives class of compounds. Those are compounds containing leucine or a derivative thereof resulting from reaction of leucine at the amino group or the carboxy group, or from the replacement of any hydrogen of glycine by a heteroatom. L-leucine is soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). L-leucine can be found primarily in most biofluids, including blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), feces, and sweat, as well as throughout most human tissues. Within the cell, L-leucine is primarily located in the mitochondria. It can also be found in the extracellular space. L-leucine exists in all living species, ranging from bacteria to humans.| L-leucine is a non-carcinogenic (not listed by IARC) potentially toxic compound. Leucine (abbreviated as Leu or L) is an α-amino acid that is used in the biosynthesis of proteins. It contains an α-amino group (which is in the protonated −NH3+ form under biological conditions), an α-carboxylic acid group (which is in the deprotonated −COO− form under biological conditions), and a side chain isobutyl group, making it a non-polar aliphatic amino acid. It is essential in humans, meaning the body cannot synthesize it: it must be obtained from the diet. Human dietary sources are foods that contain protein, such as meats, dairy products, soy products, beans and legumes. In the genetic code it is encoded by the six codons UUA, UUG, CUU, CUC, CUA, and CUG (Wikipedia). This group of essential amino acids are identified as the branched-chain amino acids, BCAAs. Branched chain amino acids (BCAA) are essential amino acids whose carbon structure is marked by a branch point. These three amino acids are critical to human life and are particularly involved in stress, energy and muscle metabolism. BCAA supplementation as therapy, both oral and intravenous, in human health and disease holds great promise. 'BCAA' denotes valine, isoleucine and leucine which are branched chain essential amino acids. Despite their structural similarities, the branched amino acids have different metabolic routes, with valine going solely to carbohydrates, leucine solely to fats and isoleucine to both.| The different metabolism accounts for different requirements for these essential amino acids in humans: 12 mg/kg, 14 mg/kg and 16 mg/kg of valine, leucine and isoleucine respectively. Furthermore, these amino acids have different deficiency symptoms. Valine deficiency is marked by neurological defects in the brain, while isoleucine deficiency is marked by muscle tremors. Many types of inborn errors of BCAA metabolism exist, and are marked by various abnormalities. The most common form is the maple syrup urine disease, marked by a characteristic urinary odor. Other abnormalities are associated with a wide range of symptoms, such as mental retardation, ataxia, hypoglycemia, spinal muscle atrophy, rash, vomiting and excessive muscle movement. Most forms of BCAA metabolism errors are corrected by dietary restriction of BCAA and at least one form is correctable by supplementation with 10 mg of biotin daily.| BCAA (Branched chain amino acids) are useful because they are metabolized primarily by muscle. Stress stat- e.g surgery, trauma, cirrhosis, infections, fever and starvation--require proportionately more BCAA than other amino acids and probably proportionately more leucine than either valine or isoleucine. BCAA and other amino acids are frequently fed intravenously (TPN) to malnourished surgical patients and in some cases of severe trauma. BCAA, particularly leucine, stimulate protein synthesis, increase reutilization of amino acids in many organs and reduce protein breakdown. Furthermore, leucine can be an important source of calories, and is superior as fuel to the ubiquitous intravenous glucose (dextrose). Leucine also stimulates insulin release, which in turn stimulates protein synthesis and inhibits protein breakdown. These effects are particularly useful in athletic training. BCAA should also replace the use of steroids as commonly used by weightlifters. Huntington's chorea and anorexic disorders both are characterized by low serum BCAA. These diseases, as well as forms of Parkinson's, may respond to BCAA therapy. BCAA, and particularly leucine, are among the amino acids most essential for muscle health (http://www.dcnutrition.com).|
HMDB0000898::1-Methylhistamine, also known as H137, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as 2-arylethylamines. These are primary amines that have the general formula RCCNH2, where R is an organic group. 1-Methylhistamine is slightly soluble (in water) and a very strong basic compound (based on its pKa). 1-Methylhistamine has been found in human bone marrow and brain tissues, and has also been detected in most biofluids, including urine, blood, feces, and cerebrospinal fluid. Within the cell, 1-methylhistamine is primarily located in the cytoplasm. 1-Methylhistamine participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, S-Adenosylhomocysteine and 1-methylhistamine can be biosynthesized from S-adenosylmethionine and histamine through the action of the enzyme histamine N-methyltransferase. In addition, 1-Methylhistamine can be converted into methylimidazole acetaldehyde; which is catalyzed by the enzyme amine oxidase [flavin-containing] a. In humans, 1-methylhistamine is involved in the histidine metabolism pathway. 1-Methylhistamine is also involved in the metabolic disorder called the histidinemia pathway.|
HMDB0001897::Substance P (SP), is an 11-amino acid neuropeptide. SP is a member of the tachykinin family of peptides because it induces rapid smooth muscle contraction in guinea pig ileum and rat duodenum. Other members of the tachykinin family, sharing common carboxyl terminal Phe-X-Gly-Leu-met-NH2 sequences in mammals, include neurokinin A and neurokinin B. In mammals, tachykinins are produced by two genes, preprotachykinin-A (PPT-A) and preprotachykinin-B (PPT-B), and SP is a product of the PPT-A gene. SP is localized in the central nervous system as well as in several peripheral tissues, including the entire length of the gastrointestinal tract as well as the colon.| The main sources of Substance P (SP) in the gut include the myenteric and submucosal plexus, intrinsic sensory neurons, as well as sensory neurons originating from the dorsal root ganglia. A newly identified gene, preprotachykinin C gene, encodes for the sequence of a new preprotachykinin protein designated hemokinin (HK) and produced primarily by hematopoietic cells. HK binds with high selectivity to NK-1R and has similar in vivo potency to SP. Like SP, HK is an 11-amino acid peptide having ~55% amino acid similarity to SP. The effects of SP are mediated by three different G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), namely neurokinin (NK)-1, 2, and 3. SP binds with high affinity to NK-1 receptor (NK-1R), and with low affinity to NK-2 and 3 receptors. NK-1 receptors are present in both small intestine and colon of animals and humans and are localized in a variety of cells, including nerves, smooth muscle, immune cells, glands, endothelial cells, as well as epithelial cells. Although NK-1 receptors have been associated with several intestinal pathophysiologic conditions (see below), NK-2 receptors have been linked mostly with circular muscle contraction, and are localized in circular muscle and muscularis mucosae. Although NK-2 receptors are present predominantly on smooth muscle and, like NK-1, can affect gut motility, NK-3 receptors are expressed predominantly in neurons and can stimulate or diminish muscle contraction indirectly following SP binding to neuronal cells in the submucosal and myenteric nerve plexuses of the gastrointestinal tract. NK-3 receptors also provide slow excitatory synaptic input to neurons in ganglia of the sphincter of Oddi. Thus, both NK-2 and NK-3 receptors affect motility responses in the GI, but there is very little evidence that they are involved in neuroimmune interactions. (PMID: 17192554  ).|
HMDB0012935::Dynorphin A is an endogenous opioid peptide that produces non-opioid receptor-mediated neural excitation.Dynorphin induces calcium influx via voltage-sensitive calcium channels in sensory neurons by activating bradykinin receptors. This action of dynorphin at bradykinin receptors is distinct from the primary signaling pathway activated by bradykinin and underlies the hyperalgesia produced by pharmacological administration of dynorphin by the spinal route in rats and mice. Blockade of spinal B1 or B2 receptor also reverses persistent neuropathic pain but only when there is sustained elevation of endogenous spinal dynorphin, which is required for maintenance of neuropathic pain. These data reveal a mechanism for endogenous dynorphin to promote pain through its agonist action at bradykinin receptors and suggest new avenues for therapeutic intervention.| Dynorphin A is a form of dynorphin.Dynorphins are a class of opioid peptides that arise from the precursor protein prodynorphin. When prodynorphin is cleaved during processing by proprotein convertase 2 (PC2), multiple active peptides are released: dynorphin A, dynorphin B, and a/b-neo-endorphin. Depolarization of a neuron containing prodynorphin stimulates PC2 processing, which occurs within synaptic vesicles in the presynaptic terminal. Occasionally, prodynorphin is not fully processed, leading to the release of "big dynorphin."This 32-amino acid molecule consists of both dynorphin A and dynorphin B.Dynorphin A, dynorphin B, and big dynorphin all contain a high proportion of basic amino acid residues, in particular lysine and arginine (29.4%, 23.1%, and 31.2% basic residues, respectively), as well as many hydrophobic residues (41.2%, 30.8%, and 34.4% hydrophobic residues, respectively). Although dynorphins are found widely distributed in the CNS, they have the highest concentrations in the hypothalamus, medulla, pons, midbrain, and spinal cord. Dynorphins are stored in large (80-120 nm diameter) dense-core vesicles that are considerably larger than vesicles storing neurotransmitters. These large dense-core vesicles differ from small synaptic vesicles in that a more intense and prolonged stimulus is needed to cause the large vesicles to release their contents into the synaptic cleft. Dense-core vesicle storage is characteristic of opioid peptides storage.| The first clues to the functionality of dynorphins came from Goldstein et al. in their work with opioid peptides. The group discovered an endogenous opioid peptide in the porcine pituitary that proved difficult to isolate. By sequencing the first 13 amino acids of the peptide, they created a synthetic version of the peptide with a similar potency to the natural peptide. Goldstein et al. applied the synthetic peptide to the guinea ileum longitudinal muscle and found it to be an extraordinarily potent opioid peptide. The peptide was called dynorphin (from the Greek dynamis=power) to describe its potency.| Dynorphins exert their effects primarily through the κ-opioid receptor (KOR), a G-protein-coupled receptor. Two subtypes of KORs have been identified: K1 and K2. Although KOR is the primary receptor for all dynorphins, the peptides do have some affinity for the μ-opioid receptor (MOR), d-opioid receptor (DOR), N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA)-type glutamate receptor. Different dynorphins show different receptor selectivities and potencies at receptors. Big dynorphin and dynorphin A have the same selectivity for human KOR, but dynorphin A is more selective for KOR over MOR and DOR than is big dynorphin. Big dynorphin is more potent at KORs than is dynorphin A. Both big dynorphin and dynorphin A are more potent and more selective than dynorphin B (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0001414::Putrescine is a polyamine. Putrescine is related to cadaverine (another polyamine). Both are produced by the breakdown of amino acids in living and dead organisms and both are toxic in large doses. Putrescine and cadaverine are largely responsible for the foul odor of putrefying flesh, but also contribute to the odor of such processes as bad breath and bacterial vaginosis. Putrescine is also found in semen. Putrescine attacks s-adenosyl methionine and converts it to spermidine. Spermidine in turn attacks another s-adenosyl methionine and converts it to spermine. Putrescine is synthesized in small quantities by healthy living cells by the action of ornithine decarboxylase. The polyamines, of which putrescine is one of the simplest, appear to be growth factors necessary for cell division. Putrescine apparently has specific role in skin physiology and neuroprotection. (PMID: 15009201  , 16364196  ). Pharmacological interventions have demonstrated convincingly that a steady supply of polyamines is a prerequisite for cell proliferation to occur. Genetic engineering of polyamine metabolism in transgenic rodents has shown that polyamines play a role in spermatogenesis, skin physiology, promotion of tumorigenesis and organ hypertrophy as well as neuronal protection. Transgenic activation of polyamine catabolism not only profoundly disturbs polyamine homeostasis in most tissues, but also creates a complex phenotype affecting skin, female fertility, fat depots, pancreatic integrity and regenerative growth. Transgenic expression of ornithine decarboxylase antizyme has suggested that this unique protein may act as a general tumor suppressor. Homozygous deficiency of the key biosynthetic enzymes of the polyamines, ornithine and S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase is not compatible with murine embryogenesis.|
HMDB0000056::beta-Alanine is the only naturally occurring beta-amino acid - an amino acid in which the amino group is at the beta-position from the carboxylate group. It is formed in vivo by the degradation of dihydrouracil and carnosine. It is a component of the naturally occurring peptides carnosine and anserine and also of pantothenic acid (vitamin B-5), which itself is a component of coenzyme A. Under normal conditions, beta-alanine is metabolized into acetic acid. beta-Alanine can undergo a transanimation reaction with pyruvate to form malonate-semialdehyde and L-alanine. The malonate semialdehyde can then be converted into malonate via malonate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase. Malonate is then converted into malonyl-CoA and enter fatty acid biosynthesis. Since neuronal uptake and neuronal receptor sensitivity to beta-alanine have been demonstrated, beta-alanine may act as a false transmitter replacing gamma-aminobutyric acid. When present in sufficiently high levels, beta-alanine can act as a neurotoxin, a mitochondrial toxin, and a metabotoxin. A neurotoxin is a compound that damages the brain or nerve tissue. A mitochondrial toxin is a compound that damages mitochondria and reduces cellular respiration as well as oxidative phosphorylation. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels.| Chronically high levels of beta-alanine are associated with at least three inborn errors of metabolism, including GABA-transaminase deficiency, hyper-beta-alaninemia, and methylmalonate semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency. beta-Alanine is a central nervous system (CNS) depressant and is an inhibitor of GABA transaminase. The associated inhibition of GABA transaminase and displacement of GABA from CNS binding sites can also lead to GABAuria (high levels of GABA in the urine) and convulsions. In addition to its neurotoxicity, beta-alanine reduces cellular levels of taurine, which are required for normal respiratory chain function. Cellular taurine depletion is known to reduce respiratory function and elevate mitochondrial superoxide generation, which damages mitochondria and increases oxidative stress (PMID: 27023909  ). Individuals suffering from mitochondrial defects or mitochondrial toxicity typically develop neurotoxicity, hypotonia, respiratory distress, and cardiac failure. beta-Alanine is a biomarker for the consumption of meat, especially red meat.|
HMDB0000161::Alanine is a non-essential amino acid made in the body from either the conversion of the carbohydrate pyruvate or the breakdown of DNA and the dipeptides carnosine and anserine. It is highly concentrated in muscle and is one of the most important amino acids released by muscle, functioning as a major energy source. Plasma alanine is often decreased when the BCAA (branched-chain amino acids) are deficient. This finding may relate to muscle metabolism. Alanine is highly concentrated in meat products and other high-protein foods like wheat germ and cottage cheese. Alanine is an important participant as well as a regulator of glucose metabolism. Alanine levels parallel blood sugar levels in both diabetes and hypoglycemia, and alanine reduces both severe hypoglycemia and the ketosis of diabetes. It is an important amino acid for lymphocyte reproduction and immunity. Alanine therapy has helped dissolve kidney stones in experimental animals. Normal alanine metabolism, like that of other amino acids, is highly dependent upon enzymes that contain vitamin B6. Alanine, like GABA, taurine, and glycine, is an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain (http://www.dcnutrition.com/AminoAcids/). L-Alanine has been found to be associated with glucagon deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000271::Sarcosine is the N-methyl derivative of glycine. Sarcosine is metabolized to glycine by the enzyme sarcosine dehydrogenase, while glycine-N-methyl transferase generates sarcosine from glycine. Sarcosine is a natural amino acid found in muscles and other body tissues. In the laboratory it may be synthesized from chloroacetic acid and methylamine. Sarcosine is naturally found in the metabolism of choline to glycine. Sarcosine is sweet to the taste and dissolves in water. It is used in manufacturing biodegradable surfactants and toothpastes as well as in other applications. Sarcosine is ubiquitous in biological materials and is present in such foods as egg yolks, turkey, ham, vegetables, legumes, etc. Sarcosine is formed from dietary intake of choline and from the metabolism of methionine, and is rapidly degraded to glycine. Sarcosine has no known toxicity, as evidenced by the lack of phenotypic manifestations of sarcosinemia, an inborn error of sarcosine metabolism. Sarcosinemia can result from severe folate deficiency because of the folate requirement for the conversion of sarcosine to glycine (Wikipedia). Sarcosine has recently been identified as a biomarker for invasive prostate cancer. It was found to be greatly increased during prostate cancer progression to metastasis and could be detected in urine. Sarcosine levels were also increased in invasive prostate cancer cell lines relative to benign prostate epithelial cells (PMID: 19212411  ).|
HMDB0000008::2-Hydroxybutyric acid (alpha-hydroxybutyrate) is an organic acid derived from alpha-ketobutyrate. alpha-Ketobutyrate is produced by amino acid catabolism (threonine and methionine) and glutathione anabolism (cysteine formation pathway) and is metabolized to propionyl-CoA and carbon dioxide (PMID: 20526369  ). 2-Hydroxybutyric acid is formed as a by-product of the formation of alpha-ketobutyrate via a reaction catalyzed by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or alpha-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase (alphaHBDH). alpha-Hydroxybutyric acid is primarily produced in mammalian hepatic tissues that catabolize L-threonine or synthesize glutathione. Oxidative stress or detoxification of xenobiotics in the liver can dramatically increase the rate of hepatic glutathione synthesis. Under such metabolic stress conditions, supplies of L-cysteine for glutathione synthesis become limiting, so homocysteine is diverted from the transmethylation pathway (which forms methionine) into the transsulfuration pathway (which forms cystathionine). 2-Hydroxybutyrate is released as a byproduct when cystathionine is cleaved into cysteine that is incorporated into glutathione. Chronic shifts in the rate of glutathione synthesis may be reflected by urinary excretion of 2-hydroxybutyrate.| 2-Hydroxybutyrate is an early marker for both insulin resistance and impaired glucose regulation that appears to arise due to increased lipid oxidation and oxidative stress (PMID: 20526369  ). 2-Hydroxybutyric acid is often found in the urine of patients suffering from lactic acidosis and ketoacidosis. 2-Hydroxybutyric acid generally appears at high concentrations in situations related to deficient energy metabolism (e.g. birth asphyxia) and also in inherited metabolic diseases affecting the central nervous system during neonatal development, such as "cerebral" lactic acidosis, glutaric aciduria type II, dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase (E3) deficiency, and propionic acidemia. More recently it has been noted that elevated levels of alpha-hydroxybutyrate in the plasma is a good marker for early-stage type II diabetes (PMID: 19166731  ). It was concluded from studies done in the mid-1970's that an increased NADH2/NAD ratio was the most important factor for the production of 2-hydroxybutyric acid (PMID: 168632  ).|
HMDB0000043::Betaine (or N,N,N-trimethylglycine) was named after its discovery in sugar beet (Beta vulgaris) in the 19th century. It is a small N-trimethylated amino acid, existing in zwitterionic form at neutral pH. It is now often called glycine betaine to distinguish it from other betaines that are widely distributed in microorganisms, plants, and animals. Many naturally occurring betaines serve as organic osmolytes, substances synthesized or taken up from the environment by cells for protection against osmotic stress, drought, high salinity, or high temperature. Intracellular accumulation of betaines permits water retention in cells, thus protecting from the effects of dehydration (Wikipedia). Betaine functions as a methyl donor in that it carries and donates methyl functional groups to facilitate necessary chemical processes. In particular, it methylates homocysteine to methionine, also producing N,N-dimethylglycine. The donation of methyl groups is important to proper liver function, cellular replication, and detoxification reactions. Betaine also plays a role in the manufacture of carnitine and serves to protect the kidneys from damage. Betaine comes from either the diet or by the oxidation of choline. Betaine insufficiency is associated with metabolic syndrome, lipid disorders, and diabetes, and may have a role in vascular and other diseases (PMID: 20346934  ). Betaine is important in development, from the pre-implantation embryo to infancy. Betaine is also widely regarded as an anti-oxidant. Betaine has been shown to have an inhibitory effect on NO release in activated microglial cells and may be an effective therapeutic component to control neurological disorders (PMID: 22801281  ). As a drug, betaine hydrochloride has been used as a source of hydrochloric acid in the treatment of hypochlorhydria. Betaine has also been used in the treatment of liver disorders, for hyperkalemia, for homocystinuria, and for gastrointestinal disturbances (Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th Ed, p1341).|
HMDB0000167::Threonine is an essential amino acid in humans. It is abundant in human plasma, particularly in newborns. Severe deficiency of threonine causes neurological dysfunction and lameness in experimental animals. Threonine is an immunostimulant which promotes the growth of thymus gland. It also can probably promote cell immune defense function. This amino acid has been useful in the treatment of genetic spasticity disorders and multiple sclerosis at a dose of 1 gram daily. It is highly concentrated in meat products, cottage cheese and wheat germ. (http://www.dcnutrition.com/AminoAcids/) The threonine content of most of the infant formulas currently on the market is approximately 20% higher than the threonine concentration in human milk. Due to this high threonine content the plasma threonine concentrations are up to twice as high in premature infants fed these formulas than in infants fed human milk. The whey proteins which are used for infant formulas are sweet whey proteins. Sweet whey results from cheese production. Threonine catabolism in mammals appears to be due primarily (70-80%) to the activity of threonine dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.103) that oxidizes threonine to 2-amino-3-oxobutyrate, which forms glycine and acetyl CoA, whereas threonine dehydratase (EC 4.2.1.16) that catabolizes threonine into 2-oxobutyrate and ammonia, is significantly less active. Increasing the threonine plasma concentrations leads to accumulation of threonine and glycine in the brain. Such accumulation affects the neurotransmitter balance which may have consequences for the brain development during early postnatal life. Thus, excessive threonine intake during infant feeding should be avoided. (PMID 9853925  ).|
HMDB0000064::Creatine is an amino acid that occurs in vertebrate tissues and in urine. In muscle tissue, creatine generally occurs as phosphocreatine. Creatine is excreted as creatinine in the urine. Creatine functions as part of the cell's energy shuttle. The high energy phosphate group of ATP is transferred to creatine to form phosphocreatine in the following reaction: Cr + ATP  PCr + ADP. This reaction is reversibly catalyzed by creatine kinase. In the human body, creatine is synthesized mainly in the liver by the use of parts from three different amino acids: arginine, glycine, and methionine. 95% of it is later stored in the skeletal muscles and the rest is stored in the brain, heart, and testes.|
HMDB0000034::Adenine is a purine base. Adenine is found in both DNA and RNA. Adenine is a fundamental component of adenine nucleotides. Adenine forms adenosine, a nucleoside, when attached to ribose, and deoxyadenosine when attached to deoxyribose; it forms adenosine triphosphate (ATP), a nucleotide, when three phosphate groups are added to adenosine. Adenosine triphosphate is used in cellular metabolism as one of the basic methods of transferring chemical energy between chemical reactions. Purine inborn errors of metabolism (IEM) are serious hereditary disorders, which should be suspected in any case of neonatal fitting, failure to thrive, recurrent infections, neurological deficit, renal disease, self-mutilation and other manifestations. Investigation usually starts with uric acid (UA) determination in urine and plasma. (OMIM 300322  , 229600  , 603027  , 232400  , 232600  , 232800  , 201450  , 220150  , 232200  , 162000  , 164050  , 278300  ). (PMID: 17052198  , 17520339  ).|
HMDB0001257::Spermidine is a polyamine formed from putrescine. It is found in almost all tissues in association with nucleic acids. It is found as a cation at all pH values, and is thought to help stabilize some membranes and nucleic acid structures. It is a precursor of spermine.|
HMDB0003339::There are two forms of glutamic acid found in nature: L-glutamic acid and D-glutamic acid. D-glutamic acid, is not endogenously produced in higher mammals. It is found naturally primarily in the cell walls of certain bacteria. D-glutamate is also present in certain foods e.g., soybeans and also arises from the turnover of the intestinal tract microflora, whose cell walls contain significant D-glutamate. Unlike other D-amino acids, D-glutamate is not oxidized by the D-amino acid oxidases, and therefore this detoxification pathway is not available for handling D-glutamate. Likewise, D-glutamic acid, when ingested, largely escapes most deamination reactions (unlike the L-counterpart). Free D-glutamate is found in mammalian tissue at surprisingly high levels, with D-glutamate accounting for 9% of the total glutamate present in liver. D-glutamate is the most potent natural inhibitor of glutathione synthesis identified to date and this may account for its localization to the liver, since circulating D-glutamate may alter redox stabiity (PMID 11158923  ). Certain eels are known to use D-glutamic acid as a phermone for chemical communication.|
HMDB0000132::Guanine is one of the five main nucleobases found in the nucleic acids DNA and RNA. Guanine is a derivative of purine, consisting of a fused pyrimidine-imidazole ring system with conjugated double bonds. Being unsaturated, the bicyclic molecule is planar. The guanine nucleoside is called guanosine. The first isolation of guanine was reported in 1844 from the excreta of sea birds, known as guano, which was used as a source of fertilizer. High affinity binding of guanine nucleotides and the ability to hydrolyze bound GTP to GDP are characteristics of an extended family of intracellular proteins. Guanine nucleotide-binding regulatory proteins may be involved in the activation of phospholipases C and A2 by hormones and other ligands. The binding of hormones to receptors that activate phospholipase C is decreased by guanine nucleotides and these hormones also stimulate a high-affinity GTPase activity in cell membranes. Effects of hormones on phospholipase C activity in cell-free preparations are dependent on the presence of guanine nucleotides. Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HPRT, EC 2.4.2.8) is a purine salvage enzyme that catalyses the conversion of hypoxanthine and guanine to their respective mononucleotides. Partial deficiency of this enzyme can result in the overproduction of uric acid leading to a severe form of gout, whilst a virtual absence of HPRT activity causes the Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, an inborn error of metabolism, which is characterised by hyperuricaemia, mental retardation, choreoathetosis and compulsive self-mutilation. Peroxynitrite induces DNA base damage predominantly at guanine (G) and 8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) nucleobases via oxidation reactions. G and 8-oxoG are the most reactive bases toward Peroxynitrite and possibly the major contributors to peroxynitrite-derived genotoxic and mutagenic lesions. The neutral G radical, reacts with NO2 to yield 8-nitroguanine and 5-nitro-4-guanidinohydantoin (PMID: 16352449  , 2435586  , 2838362  , 1487231  ).|
HMDB0000263::Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) is an important chemical compound in biochemistry. It has a high energy phosphate bond, and is involved in glycolysis and gluconeogenesis. In glycolysis, PEP is formed by the action of the enzyme enolase on 2-phosphoglycerate. Metabolism of PEP to pyruvate by pyruvate kinase (PK) generates 1 molecule of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) via substrate-level phosphorylation. ATP is one of the major currencies of chemical energy within cells. In gluconeogenesis, PEP is formed from the decarboxylation of oxaloacetate and hydrolysis of 1 guanosine triphosphate molecule. This reaction is catalyzed by the enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK). This reaction is a rate-limiting step in gluconeogenesis. (wikipedia).|
HMDB0001473::Dihydroxyacetone phosphate is an important intermediate in lipid biosynthesis and in glycolysis. Dihydroxyacetone phosphate is found to be associated with transaldolase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000126::Glycerol 3-phosphate is a chemical intermediate in the glycolysis metabolic pathway. It is commonly confused with the similarly named glycerate 3-phosphate or glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. Glycerol 3-phosphate is produced from glycerol, the triose sugar backbone of triglycerides and glycerophospholipids, by the enzyme glycerol kinase. Glycerol 3-phospate may then be converted by dehydrogenation to dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) by the enzyme glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. DHAP can then be rearranged into glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (GA3P) by triose phosphate isomerase (TIM), and feed into glycolysis. The glycerol 3-phosphate shuttle is used to rapidly regenerate NAD+ in the brain and skeletal muscle cells of mammals (wikipedia).|
HMDB0000072::cis-Aconitic acid is an intermediate in the tricarboxylic acid cycle produced by the dehydration of citric acid. The enzyme aconitase (aconitate hydratase; EC 4.2.1.3) catalyses the stereo-specific isomerization of citrate to isocitrate via cis-aconitate in the tricarboxylic acid cycle.|
HMDB0000807::3-phosphoglyceric acid (3PG) is a 3-carbon molecule that is a metabolic intermediate in both glycolysis and the Calvin cycle. This chemical is often termed PGA when referring to the Calvin cycle. In the Calvin cycle, two glycerate 3-phosphate molecules are reduced to form two molecules of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (GALP). (wikipedia).|
HMDB0000193::The citrate oxidation to isocitrate is catalyzed by the enzyme aconitase. Human prostatic secretion is remarkably rich in citric acid and low aconitase activity will therefore play a significant role in enabling accumulation of high citrate levels (PubMed ID 8115279).|
HMDB0001548::D-Ribose 5-phosphate is an important intermediate metabolite in the Pentose phosphate pathway (KEGG, map00030) and in the Purine metabolism pathway (KEGG, map00230). The intracellular ribose 5-phosphate concentration is an important determinant of the rate of de novo purine synthesis. (PMID 6699001  ).|
HMDB0000618::D-Ribulose 5-phosphate belongs to the class of organic compounds known as pentose phosphates. These are carbohydrate derivatives containing a pentose substituted by one or more phosphate groups. D-Ribulose 5-phosphate is soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). D-Ribulose 5-phosphate has been found in human prostate tissue, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as saliva and blood. Within the cell, D-ribulose 5-phosphate is primarily located in the endoplasmic reticulum. D-Ribulose 5-phosphate exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. D-Ribulose 5-phosphate participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, D-Ribulose 5-phosphate can be biosynthesized from 6-phosphogluconic acid through the action of the enzyme putative uncharacterized protein PGD. In addition, D-Ribulose 5-phosphate can be converted into D-ribose 5-phosphate through its interaction with the enzyme ribose-5-phosphate isomerase. In humans, D-ribulose 5-phosphate is involved in the pentose phosphate pathway. D-Ribulose 5-phosphate is also involved in several metabolic disorders, some of which include transaldolase deficiency, cancer (via the Warburg effect), glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, and ribose-5-phosphate isomerase deficiency.|
HMDB0000089::Cytidine is a nucleoside that is composed of the base cytosine linked to the five-carbon sugar D-ribose. Cytidine is a pyrimidine that besides being incorporated into nucleic acids, can serve as a substrate for the salvage pathway of pyrimidine nucleotide synthesis. It is a precursor of cytidine triphosphate (CTP) needed in the phosphatidylcholine (PC) and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) biosynthetic pathways. These variations probably reflect the species differences in cytidine deaminase, the enzyme that converts cytidine to uridine in the body. The transport of cytidine into the brain's extracellular fluid, and then into neurons and glia, are essential prerequisites for cytidine to be utilized in the brain. An efficient mechanism mediating the brain uptake of circulating cytidine has not yet been demonstrated. The biosynthesis of PC, the most abundant phosphatide in the brain, via the Kennedy pathway requires phosphocholine and cytidine triphosphate (CTP), a cytidine nucleotide involved in the rate-limiting step. The enzyme that converts CTP to endogenous CDP-choline (CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase) is unsaturated at physiological brain CTP levels. APOBEC is a family of enzymes that has been discovered with the ability to deaminate cytidines on RNA or DNA. The human apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide-like 3G protein (APOBEC3G, or hA3G), provides cells with an intracellular antiretroviral activity that is associated with the hypermutation of viral DNA through cytidine deamination. Indeed, hA3G belongs to a family of vertebrate proteins that contains one or two copies of a signature sequence motif unique to cytidine deaminases (CTDAs) (PMID: 16769123  , 15780864  , 16720547  ).|
HMDB0001586::The direct product of the reaction in which glycogen phosphorylase cleaves off a molecule of glucose from a greater glycogen structure. It cannot travel down many metabolic pathways and must be interconverted by the enzyme phosphoglucomutase in order to become glucose 6-phosphate. Free glucose 1-phosphate can also react with UTP to form UDP-glucose. It can then return to the greater glycogen structure via glycogen synthase.|
HMDB0001401::Glucose 6 phosphate (alpha-D-glucose 6 phosphate or G6P) is the alpha-anomer of glucose-6-phosphate. There are two anomers of glucose 6 phosphate, the alpha anomer and the beta anomer. Glucose 6 phosphate is an ester of glucose with phosphoric acid, made in the course of glucose metabolism by mammalian and other cells. It is a normal constituent of resting muscle and probably is in constant equilibrium with fructose-6-phosphate. (Stedman, 26th ed). Glucose-6-phosphate is a phosphorylated glucose molecule on carbon 6. When glucose enters a cell, it is immediately phosphorylated to G6P. This is catalyzed with hexokinase enzymes, thus consuming one ATP. A major reason for immediate phosphorylation of the glucose is so that it cannot diffuse out of the cell. The phosphorylation adds a charged group so the G6P cannot easily cross cell membranes.| G6P (Glucose 6 phosphate) can travel down two metabolic pathways, glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway. In addition to the metabolic pathways, G6P can also be stored as glycogen in the liver if blood glucose levels are high. If the body needs energy or carbon skeletons for syntheses, G6P can be isomerized to Fructose-6-phosphate and then phosphorylated to Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate. Note, the molecule now has 2 phosphoryl groups attached. The addition of the 2nd phosphoryl group is an irreversible step, so once this happens G6P will enter glycolysis and be turned into pyruvate (ATP production occurs). If blood glucose levels are high, the body needs a way to store the excess glucose. After being converted to G6P, phosphoglucose mutase (isomerase) can turn the molecule into glucose-1-phosphate. Glucose-1-phosphate can then be combined with uridine triphosphate (UTP) to form UDP-glucose. This reaction is driven by the hydrolysis of pyrophosphate that is released in the reaction. Now, the activated UDP-glucose can add to a growing glycogen molecule with the help of glycogen synthase. This is a very efficient storage mechanism for glucose since it costs the body only 1 ATP to store the 1 glucose molecule and virtually no energy to remove it from storage. It is important to note that glucose-6-phosphate is an allosteric activator of glycogen synthase, which makes sense because when the level of glucose is high the body should store the excess glucose as glycogen. On the other hand, glycogen synthase is inhibited when it is phosphorylated by protein kinase a during times of high stress or low blood glucose levels. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0000124::Fructose 6-phosphate is an important intermediate in the Carbohydrates pathway. The interconversion of glucose-6-phosphate and fructose-6-phosphate, the second step of the Embden-Meyerhof glycolytic pathway, is catalyzed by the enzyme phosphoglucose isomerase (PGI). In gluconeogenesis, fructose-6-phosphate is the immediate precursor of glucose-6-phosphate (wikipedia).|
HMDB0001068::D-Sedoheptulose 7-phosphate is an intermediate of the Pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) that has two functions: the generation of NADPH for reductive syntheses and oxidative stress responses within cells, and the formation of ribose residues for nucleotide and nucleic acid biosynthesis (PMID 16055050  ). It is formed by transketolase and acted upon (degraded) by transaldolase. Sedoheptulose 7-phosphate can be increased in the blood of patients affected with a transaldolase deficiency (TALDO1; EC 2.2.1.2) (PMID 12881455  ), a genetic disorder. Sedoheptulose is a ketoheptose, a monosaccharide with seven carbon atoms and a ketone functional group. It is one of the few heptoses found in nature (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0003337::Oxidized glutathione is a glutathione dimer formed by a disulfide bond between the cysteine sulfhydryl side chains during the course of being oxidized. glutathione participates in leukotriene synthesis and is a cofactor for the enzyme glutathione peroxidase. It is also important as a hydrophilic molecule that is added to lipophilic toxins and waste in the liver during biotransformation before they can become part of the bile. glutathione is also needed for the detoxification of methylglyoxal, a toxin produced as a by-product of metabolism. This detoxification reaction is carried out by the glyoxalase system. Glyoxalase I (EC 4.4.1.5) catalyzes the conversion of methylglyoxal and reduced glutathione to S-D-Lactoyl-glutathione. Glyoxalase II (EC 3.1.2.6) catalyzes the hydrolysis of S-D-Lactoyl-glutathione to glutathione and D-lactate.|
HMDB0000095::Cytidine monophosphate, also known as 5'-cytidylic acid and abbreviated CMP, is a nucleotide. It is an ester of phosphoric acid with the nucleoside cytidine. CMP consists of the phosphate group, the pentose sugar ribose, and the nucleobase cytosine. Cytidine monophosphate (CMP) is derived from cytidine triphosphate (CTP) with subsequent loss of two phosphates. The synthesis of the pyrimidines CTP and UTP occurs in the cytoplasm and starts with the formation of carbamoyl phosphate from glutamine and CO2. Next, aspartate undergoes a condensation reaction with carbamoyl-phosphate to form orotic acid. In a subsequent cyclization reaction, the enzyme Aspartate carbamoyltransferase forms N-carbamoyl-aspartate which is converted into dihydroorotic acid by Dihydroorotase. The latter is converted to orotate by Dihydroorotate oxidase. Orotate is covalently linked with a phosphorylated ribosyl unit with Orotate phosphoribosyltransferase (aka "PRPP transferase") catalyzing reaction, yielding orotidine monophosphate (OMP). Orotidine-5-phosphate is decarboxylated by Orotidine-5'-phosphate decarboxylase to form uridine monophosphate (UMP). UMP is phosphorylated by two kinases to uridine triphosphate (UTP) via two sequential reactions with ATP. CTP is subsequently formed by amination of UTP by the catalytic activity of CTP synthetase. Cytosine monophosphate (CMP) and uridine monophosphate (UMP) have been prescribed for the treatment of neuromuscular affections in humans. Patients treated with CMP/UMP recover from altered neurological functions. Additionally, the administration of CMP/UMP appears to favour the entry of glucose in the muscle and CMP/UMP may be important in maintaining the level of hepatic glycogen constant during exercise. [PMID:18663991  ].|
HMDB0000288::5'-Uridylic acid. A uracil nucleotide containing one phosphate group esterified to the sugar moiety in the 2', 3' or 5' position. Uridine 5'-monophosphate is a nucleotide that is found in RNA. It is an ester of phosphoric acid with the nucleoside uridine. UMP consists of the phosphate group, the pentose sugar ribose, and the nucleobase uracil. (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0000045::Adenosine monophosphate, also known as 5'-adenylic acid and abbreviated AMP, is a nucleotide that is found in RNA. It is an ester of phosphoric acid with the nucleoside adenosine. AMP consists of the phosphate group, the pentose sugar ribose, and the nucleobase adenine. AMP can be produced during ATP synthesis by the enzyme adenylate kinase. AMP has recently been approved as a 'Bitter Blocker' additive to foodstuffs. When AMP is added to bitter foods or foods with a bitter aftertaste it makes them seem 'sweeter'. This potentially makes lower calorie food products more palatable.|
HMDB0000532::N-acetylglycine is used is in biological research of peptidomimetics. It is used as the blocking agent of the N-terminus to prepare unnatural and unusual amino acids and amino acid analogs as well as to modify peptides. N-Substituted glycine analogs are widely used in peptidomimetics and drug research. Excessive amounts N-acetyl amino acids including N-acetylglycine (as well as N-acetylserine, N-acetylglutamine, N-acetylglutamate, N-acetylalanine, Nacetylmethionine and smaller amounts of N-acetylthreonine, N-acetylleucine, N-acetylvaline and N-acetylisoleucine) can be detected in the urine with individuals with acylase I defiency, a genetic disorder. This enzyme is involved in the degradation of N-acylated proteins. Individuals with this disorder will experience convulsions, hearing loss ond difficulty feeding.|
HMDB0002931::Acetylation of the N-terminal amino acid (-NH2 acetylation) is a common protein modification in eukaryotes but is rarely encountered in prokaryotes. In mammalians,80 to 90 percent of the cytosolic proteins are subjected to an irreversible, cotranslational amino acid acetylation at their N-terminus.| Acetylation of the N-terminal amino acid (-NH2 acetylation) is a common protein modification in eukaryotes but is rarely encountered in prokaryotes. In mammalians, 80 to 90 percent of the cytosolic proteins are subjected to an irreversible, cotranslational amino acid acetylation at their N-terminus. N-acetylated proteins are catabolized in the cytosol by the ATP-ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal pathway. Several types of aminoacylases can be distinguished on the basis of substrate specificity. Aminoacylase I (ACY1; EC 3.5.1.14), the most abundant type, is a soluble homodimeric zinc binding enzyme that catalyzes the formation of free aliphatic amino acids from N-acetylated precursors. It is encoded by the aminoacylase 1 gene (ACY1) on chromosome 3p21 that comprises 15 exons (OMIM 609924  ). Preferred substrates of ACY1 are aliphatic amino acids with a short-chain acyl moiety, especially N-acetyl-methionine. However, ACY1 can also catalyze the reverse reaction, the synthesis of acetylated amino acids. Functional aminoacylase I is crucial in the last step in this degradation as it catalyzes the hydrolysis of N-acetylated amino acids into acetate and the free amino acid. Although N-acetylation occurs in many metabolic pathways and N-acetylated metabolites are known to accumulate in several inborn errors, such as aminoacylase I deficiency. There are only a few reports on N-acetylated amino acids detected in urine. Identification of N-acetylated amino acids by routine GC-MS may be problematic for several reasons. The major problem is linked to the identification strategy itself. Identification of an unknown compound in mass spectrometry is usually based on comparison of its spectrum against a library of reference spectra (PMID: 16465618  , 16274666  , 17723438  ).|
HMDB0000958::trans-Aconitic acid is normally present in normal human urine, and it has been suggested that is present in larger amounts with Reye's syndrome and organic aciduria. trans-Aconitic acid is a substrate of enzyme trans-aconitate 2-methyltransferase (EC 2.1.1.144) (PMID: 7096501  , 4019674  , 2950263  ). Trans-aconitate in the urine is a biomarker for the consumption of soy products.|
HMDB0000667::Iodide is actively absorbed from the bloodstream and concentrated in the thyroid follicles. (If there is a deficiency of dietary iodine, the thyroid enlarges in an attempt to trap more iodine, resulting in goitre.) Via a reaction with the enzyme thyroperoxidase, iodine is covalently bound to tyrosine residues in the thyroglobulin molecules, forming monoiodotyrosine (MIT) and diiodotyrosine (DIT). Linking two moieties of DIT produces thyroxine. Combining one particle of MIT and one particle of DIT produces triiodothyronine. The thyronamines function via some unknown mechanism to inhibit neuronal activity; this plays an important role in the hibernation cycles of mammals. One effect of administering the thyronamines is a severe drop in body temperature. Both T3 and T4 are used to treat thyroid hormone deficiency (hypothyroidism). They are both absorbed well by the gut, so can be given orally. Levothyroxine, the most commonly used synthetic thyroxine form, is a stereoisomer of physiological thyroxine, which is metabolised more slowly and hence usually only needs once-daily administration. Natural desiccated thyroid hormones, which are derived from pig thyroid glands, are a "natural" hypothyroid treatment containing 20% T3 and traces of T2, T1 and calcitonin. A group of metabolites derived from thyroxine and triiodothyronine via the peripheral enzymatic removal of iodines from the thyroxine nucleus. Thyronine is the thyroxine nucleus devoid of its four iodine atoms.|
HMDB0001220::The naturally occurring prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) is known in medicine as dinoprostone, and it is the most common and most biologically active of the mammalian prostaglandins. It has important effects during labour and also stimulates osteoblasts to release factors which stimulate bone resorption by osteoclasts (a type of bone cell that removes bone tissue by removing the bone's mineralized matrix). PGE2 is also the prostaglandin that ultimately induces fever. PGE2 has been shown to increase vasodilation and cAMP production, enhance the effects of bradykinin and histamine, and induce uterine contractions and platelet aggregation. PGE2 is also responsible for maintaining the open passageway of the fetal ductus arteriosus, decreasing T-cell proliferation and lymphocyte migration, and activating the secretion of IL-1α and IL-2. PGE2 exhibits both pro- and anti-inflammatory effects, particularly on dendritic cells (DC). Depending on the nature of maturation signals, PGE2 has different and sometimes opposite effects on DC biology. PGE2 exerts an inhibitory action, reducing the maturation of DC and their ability to present antigen. PGE2 has also been shown to stimulate DC and promote IL-12 production when given in combination with TNF-alpha. PGE2 is an environmentally bioactive substance. Its action is prolonged and sustained by other factors especially IL-10. It modulates the activities of professional DC by acting on their differentiation, maturation, and their ability to secrete cytokines. PGE2 is a potent inducer of IL-10 in bone marrow-derived DC (BM-DC). PGE2-induced IL-10 is a key regulator of the BM-DC pro-inflammatory phenotype (PMID: 16978535  ).| Prostaglandins are eicosanoids. The eicosanoids consist of the prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), leukotrienes (LTs), and lipoxins (LXs). The PGs and TXs are collectively identified as prostanoids. Prostaglandins were originally shown to be synthesized in the prostate gland, thromboxanes from platelets (thrombocytes), and leukotrienes from leukocytes, hence the derivation of their names. All mammalian cells except erythrocytes synthesize eicosanoids. These molecules are extremely potent and are able to cause profound physiological effects at very dilute concentrations. All eicosanoids function locally at the site of synthesis through receptor-mediated G-protein linked signalling pathways.|
HMDB0002878::In inorganic chemistry, a nitrate is a salt of nitric acid. In organic chemistry the esters of nitric acid and various alcohols are called nitrates. The nitrate ion is a polyatomic anion with the empirical formula NO3- and a molecular mass of 62.01 daltons; it consists of one central nitrogen atom surrounded by three identical oxygen atoms in a trigonal planar arrangement. The nitrate ion carries a negative one formal charge. Nitrates should not be confused with nitrites, the salts of nitrous acid. Organic compounds containing the nitro functional group (which has the same formula and structure as the nitrate ion save that one of the O2 atoms is replaced by the R group) are known as nitro compounds. Nitrate ions can be toxic. In particular, nitrate toxicosis in humans occurs through enterohepatic metabolism of nitrates to ammonia, with nitrite being an intermediate. Nitrites oxidize the iron atoms in hemoglobin from Ferrous Iron (2+) to Ferric Iron (3+), rendering it unable to carry oxygen. This condition is called methemoglobinemia and can lead to a lack of oxygen in tissues. Methemoglobinemia can be treated with methylene blue. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0002243::Picolinic acid is a metabolite of the tryptophan catabolism. Picolinic acid is produced under inflammatory conditions and a costimulus with interferon-gamma (IFNgamma) of macrophage (Mphi) effector functions, is a selective inducer of the Mphi inflammatory protein-1alpha (MIP-1alpha) and -1beta (MIPs), two chemokines/cytokines involved in the elicitation of the inflammatory reactions and in the development of the Th1 responses. IFNgamma and picolinic acid have reciprocal effects on the production of MIPs chemokines and the expression of their receptor. The concerted action of IFNgamma and picolinic acid on MIP-1alpha/beta chemokine/receptor system is likely to be of pathophysiological significance and to represent an important regulatory mechanism for leukocyte recruitment and distribution into damaged tissues during inflammatory responses. Picolinic acid has an effect on the production of L-arginine-derived reactive nitrogen intermediates in macrophages, by augmenting IFN-gamma-induced NO2- production, and acts synergistically with IFN-gamma in activating macrophages. Children with acrodermatitis enteropathica (AE) are treated with oral zinc dipicolinate (zinc-PA). The concentration of picolinic acid in the plasma of asymptomatic children with AE was significantly less than that of normal children. However, oral treatment with PA alone is ineffective. The results support the hypothesis that the genetic defect in AE is in the tryptophan pathway, although the role of PA in zinc metabolism remains to be defined. (PMID: 15206716  , 8473748  , 1701787  , 6694049  ).|
HMDB0000054::Bilirubin is a bile pigment that is a degradation product of heme. In particular, bilirubin is a yellow breakdown product of normal heme catabolism. Its levels are elevated in certain diseases and it is responsible for the yellow colour of bruises. Bilirubin is an excretion product and the body does not control its levels. Bilirubin levels reflect the balance between production and excretion. Thus, there is no "normal" level of bilirubin. Bilirubin consists of an open chain of four pyrroles (tetrapyrrole). In contrast, the heme molecule is a closed ring of four pyrroles, called porphyrin (Wikipedia). Bilirubin is found to be associated with Crigler-Najjar syndrome type I, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000244::Riboflavin or vitamin B2 is an easily absorbed, water-soluble micronutrient with a key role in maintaining human health. Like the other B vitamins, it supports energy production by aiding in the metabolizing of fats, carbohydrates, and proteins. Vitamin B2 is also required for red blood cell formation and respiration, antibody production, and for regulating human growth and reproduction. It is essential for healthy skin, nails, hair growth and general good health, including regulating thyroid activity. Riboflavin is found in milk, eggs, malted barley, liver, kidney, heart, and leafy vegetables. Riboflavin is yellow or orange-yellow in color and in addition to being used as a food coloring it is also used to fortify some foods. It can be found in baby foods, breakfast cereals, sauces, processed cheese, fruit drinks and vitamin-enriched milk products. The richest natural source is yeast. It occurs in the free form only in the retina of the eye, in whey, and in urine; its principal forms in tissues and cells are as flavin mononucleotide and flavin adenine dinucleotide.|
HMDB0001520::Flavin mononucleotide (FMN), or riboflavin-5′-phosphate, is a biomolecule produced from riboflavin (vitamin B2) by the enzyme riboflavin kinase and functions as prosthetic group of various oxidoreductases including NADH dehydrogenase as well as cofactor in biological blue-light photo receptors. During the catalytic cycle, the reversible interconversion of oxidized (FMN), semiquinone (FMNH<U+2022>) and reduced (FMNH2) forms occurs in the various oxidoreductases. FMN is a stronger oxidizing agent than NAD and is particularly useful because it can take part in both one- and two-electron transfers. Flavin mononucleotide is also used as an orange-red food colour additive. It is the principal form in which riboflavin is found in cells and tissues.|
HMDB0000526::5a-Tetrahydrocortisol is a normal human metabolite. However its increased ratio (5alpha-Tetrahydrocortisol + Tetrahydrocortisol) over Tetrahydrocortisone in urine is the biochemical marker for the syndrome of apparent mineralocorticoid excess (AME). AME is a heritable form of hypertension due to an inborn error of cortisol metabolism and is characterized by hypokalemia and low renin levels despite subnormal or normal levels of aldosterone and other known mineralocorticoids. The syndrome is attributable to congenital deficiency of the enzyme 11 beta-hydroxydehydrogenase (11 beta-HSD), which converts cortisol to biologically inactive cortisone. This results in a prolonged half-life of Cortisol, which acts at the kidney level as a potent mineralocorticoid. (PMID: 8732999  ).|
HMDB0001248::FAD is a condensation product of riboflavin and adenosine diphosphate. The coenzyme of various aerobic dehydrogenases, e.g., D-amino acid oxidase and L-amino acid oxidase. (Lehninger, Principles of Biochemistry, 1982, p972).|
HMDB0000903::Cortisol is a corticosteroid hormone that is involved in the response to stress; it increases blood pressure and blood sugar levels and suppresses the immune system. Synthetic cortisol, also known as hydrocortisone, is used as a drug mainly to fight allergies and inflammation. -- Wikipedia; As an oral or injectable drug, cortisol is also known as hydrocortisone. It is used as an immunosuppressive drug, given by injection in the treatment of severe allergic reactions such as anaphylaxis and angioedema, in place of prednisolone in patients who need steroid treatment but cannot take oral medication, and peri-operatively in patients on long-term steroid treatment to prevent an Addisonian crisis. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0000197::Indoleacetic acid (IAA) is a breakdown product of tryptophan metabolism and is often produced by the action of bacteria in the mammalian gut. Some endogenous production of IAA in mammalian tissues also occurs. It may be produced by the decarboxylation of tryptamine or the oxidative deamination of tryptophan. IAA frequently occurs at low levels in urine and has been found in elevated levels in the urine of patients with phenylketonuria ((PMID: 13610897  ). Using material extracted from human urine, it was discovered by Kogl in 1933 that Indoleacetic acid is also an important plant hormone (PMID: 13610897  ). Specifically IAA is a member of the group of phytohormones called auxins. IAA is generally considered to be the most important native auxin. Plant cells synthesize IAA from tryptophan. (wikipedia) IAA and some derivatives can be oxidised by horseradish peroxidase (HRP) to cytotoxic species. IAA is only toxic after oxidative decarboxylation; the effect of IAA/HRP is thought to be due in part to the formation of methylene-oxindole, which may conjugate with DNA bases and protein thiols. IAA/HRP could be used as the basis for targeted cancer, a potential new role for plant auxins in cancer therapy. (PMID: 11163327  ).|
HMDB0000678::Isovalerylglycine (IVG) is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction: acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycine. Isovalerylglycine is a byproduct of the catabolism of the aminoacid leucine. Accumulation of isovalerylglycine occurs in Isovaleric Acidemia (IVA). IVA (OMIM/ McKusick 243500) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase (EC 1.3.99.10) gene. The deficiency of this enzyme in the metabolism of leucine leads to the accumulation of a series of isovaleryl-CoA metabolites, such as isovalerylglycine. It is very important to caution for false positive results when screening for isovaleric acidemia by tandem mass spectrometry based on dried blood-spot levels of C5-acylcarnitines, including isovalerylcarnitine and its isomer, pivaloylcarnitine; pivaloylcarnitine is derived from pivalate-generating antibiotics, and has caused many false-positive results (PMID: 17850781  ). Isovalerylglycine is a biomarker for the consumption of cheese.|
HMDB0000052::Arginosuccinic acid is a basic amino acid. Some cells synthesize it from citrulline, aspartic acid and use it as a precursor for arginine in the urea cycle or Citrulline-NO cycle. The enzyme that catalyzes the reaction is argininosuccinate synthetase. Argininosuccinic acid is a precursor to fumarate in the citric acid cycle via argininosuccinate lyase. Defects in the argininosuccinate lyase enzyme can lead to argininosuccinate lyase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism. Argininosuccinate (ASA) lyase deficiency results in defective cleavage of ASA. This leads to an accumulation of ASA in cells and an excessive excretion of ASA in urine (argininosuccinic aciduria). In virtually all respects, this disorder shares the characteristics of other urea cycle defects. The most important characteristic of ASA lyase deficiency is its propensity to cause hyperammonemia in affected individuals. ASA in affected individuals is excreted by the kidney at a rate practically equivalent to the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). Whether ASA itself causes a degree of toxicity due to hepatocellular accumulation is unknown; such an effect could help explain hyperammonemia development in affected individuals. Regardless, the name of the disease is derived from the rapid clearance of ASA in urine, although elevated levels of ASA can be found in plasma. ASA lyase deficiency is associated with high mortality and morbidity rates. Symptoms of ASA lyase deficiency include anorexia, irritability rapid breathing, lethargy and vomiting. Extreme symptoms include coma and cerebral edema.|
HMDB0000300::Uracil is a common naturally occurring pyrimidine found in RNA, it base pairs with adenine and is replaced by thymine in DNA. Methylation of uracil produces thymine. Uracil's use in the body is to help carry out the synthesis of many enzymes necessary for cell function through bonding with riboses and phosphates. Uracil serves as allosteric regulator and coenzyme for many important biochemical reactions. UDP and UTP regulate CPSase II activity in animals. UDP-glucose regulates the conversion of glucose to galactose in the liver and other tissues in the process of carbohydrate metabolism. Uracil is also involved in the biosynthesis of polysaccharides and the transportation of sugars containing aldehydes. Uracil is found to be associated with argininemia and carbamoyl phosphate synthetase deficiency, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000296::Uridine, also known as beta-uridine or 1-beta-D-ribofuranosylpyrimidine-2,4(1H,3H)-dione, is a member of the class of compounds known as pyrimidine nucleosides. Pyrimidine nucleosides are compounds comprising a pyrimidine base attached to a ribosyl or deoxyribosyl moiety. More specifically, uridine is a nucleoside consisting of uracil and D-ribose and a component of RNA. Uridine is soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Uridine can be synthesized from uracil. It is one of the five standard nucleosides which make up nucleic acids, the others being adenosine, thymidine, cytidine and guanosine. The five nucleosides are commonly abbreviated to their one-letter codes U, A, T, C and G respectively. Uridine is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, nikkomycin Z, 3'-(enolpyruvyl)uridine 5'-monophosphate, and 5-aminomethyl-2-thiouridine.| Uridine can be found in most biofluids, including urine, breast milk, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and blood. Within the cell, uridine is primarily located in the mitochondria, in the nucleus and the lysosome. It can also be found in the extracellular space. As an essential nucleoside, uridine exists in all living species, ranging from bacteria to humans. In humans, uridine is involved in several metabolic disorders, some of which include dhydropyrimidinase deficiency,  MNGIE (mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy), and beta-ureidopropionase deficiency. Moreover, uridine is found to be associated with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, which is an inborn error of metabolism. Uridine is a nucleoside consisting of uracil and D-ribose and a component of RNA. Uridine plays a role in the glycolysis pathway of galactose. In humans there is no catabolic process to metabolize galactose. Therefore, galactose is converted to glucose and metabolized via the normal glucose metabolism pathways. More specifically, consumed galactose is converted into galactose 1-phosphate (Gal-1-P). This molecule is a substrate for the enzyme galactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase which transfers a UDP molecule to the galactose molecule. The end result is UDP-galactose and glucose-1-phosphate. This process is continued to allow the proper glycolysis of galactose. Uridine is found in many foods (anything containing RNA) but is destroyed in the liver and gastrointestinal tract, and so no food, when consumed, has ever been reliably shown to elevate blood uridine levels. On the other hand, consumption of RNA-rich foods may lead to high levels of purines (adenine and guanosine) in blood. High levels of purines are known to increase uric acid production and may aggravate or lead to conditions such as gout.|
HMDB0000042::Acetic acid is one of the simplest carboxylic acids. It is an important chemical reagent and industrial chemical that is used in the production of plastic soft drink bottles, photographic film; and polyvinyl acetate for wood glue, as well as many synthetic fibres and fabrics. In households diluted acetic acid is often used as a cleaning agent. In the food industry acetic acid is used as an acidity regulator. The acetyl group, derived from acetic acid, is fundamental to the biochemistry of virtually all forms of life. When bound to coenzyme A it is central to the metabolism of carbohydrates and fats. However, the concentration of free acetic acid in cells is kept at a low level to avoid disrupting the control of the pH of the cell contents. Acetic acid is produced and excreted by certain bacteria, notably the Acetobacter genus and Clostridium acetobutylicum. These bacteria are found universally in foodstuffs, water, and soil, and acetic acid is produced naturally as fruits and some other foods spoil. Acetic acid is also a component of the vaginal lubrication of humans and other primates, where it appears to serve as a mild antibacterial agent. Acetic acid is found to be associated with phenylketonuria, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000714::Hippuric acid is an acyl glycine formed by the conjugation of benzoic acid with glycine. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction: acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycine. Hippuric acid is a normal component of urine and is typically increased with increased consumption of phenolic compounds (tea, wine, fruit juices). These phenols are converted to benzoic acid which is then converted to hippuric acid and excreted in the urine. Hippuric acid is the most frequently used biomarker in the biological monitoring of occupational exposure to toluene. This product of solvent biotransformation may be also found in the urine of individuals who have not been exposed to the solvent. A smaller fraction of the absorbed toluene is oxidized to aromatic compounds including ortho-cresol, which is not found significantly in the urine of nonexposed individuals. The concentration of hippuric acid in the urine of individuals exposed to a low toluene concentration does not differ from that of individuals not exposed to the solvent. This has led to the conclusion that hippuric acid should not be utilized in the biological monitoring of occupational exposure to low levels of toluene in the air. Protein-bound organic acids such as hippuric acid are markedly accumulated in uremic plasma and produce defective protein binding of drugs (PMID: 9120876  , 8734460  ). Hippuric acid is found to be associated with phenylketonuria, propionic acidemia, and tyrosinemia I, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000925::Trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) is an oxidation product of trimethylamine and a common metabolite in animals and humans. In particular, trimethylamine-N-oxide is biosynthesized endogenously from trimethylamine, which is derived from choline, which can be derived from dietary lecithin (phosphatidylcholines) or dietary carnitine. TMAO decomposes to trimethylamine (TMA), which is the main odorant that is characteristic of degrading seafood. TMAO is an osmolyte that the body will use to counteract the effects of increased concentrations of urea (due to kidney failure) and high levels can be used as a biomarker for kidney problems. Fish odor syndrome or trimethylaminuria is a defect in the production of the enzyme flavin containing monooxygenase 3 (FMO3) causing incomplete breakdown of trimethylamine from choline-containing food into trimethylamine oxide. Trimethylamine then builds up and is released in the person's sweat, urine, and breath, giving off a strong fishy odor. The concentration of TMAO in the blood increases after consuming foods containing carnitine or lecithin (phosphatidylcholines), if the bacteria that convert those substances to TMAO are present in the gut (PMID: 23614584  ). High concentrations of carnitine are found in red meat, some energy drinks, and certain dietary supplements; lecithin is found in eggs and is commonly used as an ingredient in processed food.| High levels of TMAO (Trimethylamine N-oxide) are found in many seafoods.  Some types of normal gut bacteria (e.g. species of Acinetobacter) in the human gut convert dietary carnitine and dietary lecithin to TMAO (PMID: 21475195  ). TMAO alters cholesterol metabolism in the intestines, in the liver and in arterial wall. When TMAO is present, cholesterol metabolism is altered and there is an increased deposition of cholesterol within, and decreased removal of cholesterol from, peripheral cells such as those in the artery wall (PMID: 23563705  ). Urinary TMAO is a biomarker for the consumption of fish, especially cold-water fish. Trimethylamine N-oxide is found to be associated with maple syrup urine disease and propionic acidemia, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000145::Estrone is a major mammalian estrogen. The conversion of the natural C19 steroids, testosterone and androstenedione into estrone is dependent on a complex key reaction catalyzed by the cytochrome P450 aromatase (EC 1.14.14.1, unspecific monooxygenase), which is expressed in many tissues of the adult human (e.g. ovary, fat tissue), but not in the liver. The ovaries after menopause continue to produce androstenedione and testosterone in significant amounts and these androgens are converted in fat, muscle, and skin into estrone. When women between the ages of 45 and 64 years have prophylactic oophorectomy (when hysterectomy is performed for benign disease to prevent the development of ovarian cancer), evidence suggests that oophorectomy increases the subsequent risk of coronary heart disease (CHD) and osteoporosis. Whereas 14,000 women die of ovarian cancer every year nearly 490,000 women die of heart disease and 48,000 women die within 1 year after hip fracture. Therefore, the decision to perform prophylactic oophorectomy should be approached with great caution for the majority of women who are at low risk of developing ovarian cancer. Steroid sulfatase (EC 3.1.6.2, STS) hydrolyzes steroid sulfates, such as estrone sulfate to estrone which can be converted to steroids with potent estrogenic properties, that is, estradiol; STS activity is much higher in breast tumors and high levels of STS mRNA expression in tumors are associated with a poor prognosis. The biological roles of estrogens in tumorigenesis are certainly different between the endometrium and breast, although both are considered "estrogen-dependent tissues". 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases (EC 1.1.1.62, 17-HSDs) are enzymes involved in the formation of active sex steroids. estrone is interconverted by two enzymes 17-HSD types. Type 1 converts estrone to estradiol and Type 2 catalyzes the reverse reaction. (PMID: 17653961  , 17513923  , 17470679  , 17464097  ).|
HMDB0000153::Estriol is a metabolite of estrone metabolized via 16alpha-hydroxyestrone through the enzyme 16alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.147) or to 2- or 4-hydroxyestrone (catechol estrogens) by the action of catecho-O-methyltransferase (EC 2.1.1.6). The latter metabolites can be formed in the brain and may compete with receptors for catecholamines. Metabolites are conjugated with sulfate or glucuronide before excretion by the kidney. During pregnancy, estriol constitutes 60-70% of the total estrogens, increasing to 300-500-fold in relation to non-pregnant women. The late term human fetus produces relatively large amounts of 16 alphahydroxy DHEA, which serves the mother as a precursor of estriol. It has been shown that 90% of the precursors for the formation of estriol are of fetal origin. If abnormal maternal serum screening results, specifically low levels of unconjugated estriol in the second trimester are detected, a diagnosis of Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS),or RSH is suspected. SLOS is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations of the gene encoding 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase (EC 1.3.1.21, DHCR7). (PMID: 16202579  , 16112271  , 16097001  ).|
HMDB0001490::Vanylglycol (MHPG) is a O-methylated metabolite of normetanephrine. MHPG is formed by catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) from norepinephrine. Catecholamines play an important role in platelet activation and aggregation, epinephrine being the most potent one. Catecholamines are substantially increased during stress, exercise or smoking and could result in clinically important platelet activation if their action was not rapidly regulated. MHPG is found normally in urine, in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid. Alcohol consumption increases the level of HMPG in urine and CSF. Alcohol dehydrogenase has been shown to act on norepinephrine and produce HMPG (PMID: 11958479  , 9706478  , 7735466  , 2455302  ). Vanylglycol is found to be associated with aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency and sepiapterin reductase deficiency, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0001434::Chronically high levels of 3-methoxytyrosine are associated with aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC, EC 4.1.1.28) deficiency, an inborn error of metabolism that affects serotonin and dopamine biosynthesis. Patients are usually detected in infancy due to developmental delay, hypotonia, and extrapyramidal movements. Diagnosis is based on an abnormal neurotransmitter metabolite profile in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and reduced AADC activity in plasma. 3-Methoxytyrosine is elevated in CSF, plasma, and urine (PMID: 1357595  , 1281049  , 16288991  ).|
HMDB0000763::5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5HIAA) is a breakdown product of serotonin that is excreted in the urine. Serotonin is a hormone found at high levels in many body tissues. Serotonin and 5HIAA are produced in excess amounts by carcinoid tumors, and levels of these substances may be measured in the urine to test for carcinoid tumors (NCI). 5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid is found to be associated with aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency, celiac disease, and sepiapterin reductase deficiency, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000118::Homovanillic acid is a dopamine metabolite occurring in human biofluids. A high proportion of patients with neuroblastoma excrete increased amounts of it in their urine. Homovanillic acid is a major catecholamine metabolite. It is used as a reagent to detect oxidative enzymes (Wikipedia). Homovanillic acid is found to be associated with aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency, celiac disease, growth hormone deficiency, and sepiapterin reductase deficiency, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000472::5-Hydroxy-L-tryptophan is an aromatic amino acid naturally produced by the body from the essential amino acid L-tryptophan. 5-Hydroxy-L-tryptophan is the immediate precursor of the neurotransmitter serotonin. The conversion to serotonin is catalyzed by the enzyme aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.28) (AADC1 also known as DOPA decarboxylase), an essential enzyme in the metabolism of the monoamine neurotransmitters. An accumulation of 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan in cerebrospinal fluid occurs in aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency (AADC deficiency) (OMIM: 608643  ) accompanied by an increased excretion in the urine of the patients, which are indicative of the disorder but not specific. 5-Hydroxy-L-tryptophan is also increased in other disorders such as in Parkinson's patients with severe postural instability and gait disorders. The amount of endogenous 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan available for serotonin synthesis depends on the availability of tryptophan and on the activity of various enzymes, especially tryptophan hydroxylase (EC 1.14.16.4), indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (EC 1.13.11.52), and tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) (EC 1.13.11.11). 5-Hydroxy-L-tryptophan has been used clinically for over 30 years.| In addition to its use in the treatment of depression, the therapeutic administration of 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan has been shown to be effective in treating a wide variety of conditions, including fibromyalgia, insomnia, binge eating associated with obesity, cerebellar ataxia, and chronic headaches. 5-Hydroxy-L-tryptophan easily crosses the blood-brain barrier and effectively increases central nervous system (CNS) synthesis of serotonin. Supplementation with 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan is hypothesized to normalize serotonin synthesis, which is putatively related to its antidepressant properties (PMID: 9295177  , 17240182  , 16023217  ). When present in sufficiently high levels, 5-hydroxytryptophan can be a neurotoxin and a metabotoxin. A neurotoxin is a compound that disrupts or attacks neural cells or tissue. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Signs and symptoms of AADC deficiency generally appear in the first year of life. Affected infants may have severe developmental delay, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), muscle stiffness, difficulty moving, and involuntary writhing movements of the limbs (athetosis). They may be lacking in energy (lethargic), feed poorly, startle easily, and have sleep disturbances. Since 5-hydroxytryptophan is a precursor to serotonin, altered levels of serotonin can accumulate in the brain, which leads to abnormal neural signalling.| Infants with AADC (aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase) deficiency have very low levels of neural signalling molecules while individuals who consume high levels of 5-hydroxytryptophan will have very high levels of neural signalling molecules. Both conditions can lead to vomiting, nausea, extreme drowsiness, and lethargy. 5-Hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), also known as oxitriptan (INN) is sold over-the-counter in the United Kingdom, the United States, and Canada as a dietary supplement for use as an antidepressant, appetite suppressant, and sleep aid. It is also marketed in many European countries for the indication of major depression under trade names such as Cincofarm, Levothym, Levotonine, Oxyfan, Telesol, Tript-OH, and Triptum. Several double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trials have demonstrated the effectiveness of 5-HTP in the treatment of depression, though a lack of high-quality studies has been noted. More and larger studies are needed to determine if 5-HTP is truly effective in treating depression.|
HMDB0011716::N-Acetylvanilalanine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as tyrosine and derivatives. Tyrosine and derivatives are compounds containing tyrosine or a derivative thereof resulting from reaction of tyrosine at the amino group or the carboxy group, or from the replacement of any hydrogen of glycine by a heteroatom. N-Acetylvanilalanine is slightly soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). N-Acetylvanilalanine has been primarily detected in urine. |
HMDB0011714::Vanilpyruvic acid, also known as hmppa or vanilpyruvate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenylpyruvic acid derivatives. Phenylpyruvic acid derivatives are compounds containing a phenylpyruvic acid moiety, which consists of a phenyl group substituted at the second position by an pyruvic acid. Vanilpyruvic acid is slightly soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). Vanilpyruvic acid has been primarily detected in urine. |
HMDB0000866::Acetyltyrosine is a side chain reaction of tyrosine. It converts to tyrosine and then can be used in neurotransmitter treatment as a precursor of cathecholamine (http://www.neuroassist.com/). N-acetyl-L-tyrosine is found to be associated with aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency and tyrosinemia I, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000291::Vanillylmandelic acid is one of the products of the catabolism of catecholamines (epinephrine, norepinephrine and dopamine). High levels of vanillylmandelic acid can indicate an adrenal gland tumor (pheochromocytoma) or another type of tumor that produces catecholamines (WebMD). Vanillylmandelic acid is found to be associated with aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000259::Serotonin is a biochemical messenger and regulator, synthesized from the essential amino acid L-Tryptophan. Serotonin in the nervous system acts as a local transmitter at synapses, and as a paracrine or hormonal modulator of circuits upon diffusion, allowing a wide variety of "state-dependent" behavioral responses to different stimuli. Serotonin is widely distributed in the nervous system of vertebrates and invertebrates and some of its behavioral effects have been preserved along evolution. Such is the case of aggressive behavior and rhythmic motor patterns , including those responsible for feeding. In vertebrates, which display a wider and much more sophisticated behavioral repertoire, serotonin also modulates sleep, the arousal state , sexual behavior, and others, and deficiencies of the serotonergic system causes disorders such as depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, phobias, posttraumatic stress disorder, epilepsy, and generalized anxiety disorder. Serotonin has three different modes of action in the nervous system: as transmitter, acting locally at synaptic boutons; upon diffusion at a distance from its release sites, producing paracrine (also called volume) effects, and by circulating in the blood stream, producing hormonal effects. The three modes can affect a single neuronal circuit. (PMID: 16047543  ).|
HMDB0000819::Normetanephrine, also known as normetadrenaline or N111, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as methoxyphenols. Methoxyphenols are compounds containing a methoxy group attached to the benzene ring of a phenol moiety. Normetanephrine exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Normetanephrine has been found in human brain and endocrine gland tissues, and has also been primarily detected in feces, urine, blood, and cerebrospinal fluid. Within the cell, normetanephrine is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Normetanephrine participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, Normetanephrine can be converted into 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycolaldehyde; which is mediated by the enzyme amine oxidase [flavin-containing] a. In addition, Normetanephrine and pyrocatechol can be biosynthesized from norepinephrine and guaiacol through the action of the enzyme catechol O-methyltransferase. In humans, normetanephrine is involved in the tyrosine metabolism pathway and the disulfiram action pathway. Normetanephrine is also involved in several metabolic disorders, some of which include tyrosinemia, transient, OF the newborn pathway, the tyrosinemia type I pathway, the hawkinsinuria pathway, and the alkaptonuria pathway. Normetanephrine has been found to be associated with several diseases known as brunner syndrome and amphetamine psychosis; normetanephrine has also been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency.|
HMDB0000913::Vanillactic acid is an acidic catecholamine metabolite present in normal human urine (PMID 7524950  ), in normal human CSF (PMID 7914240  ), and increased in the CSF of newborns with neonatal epileptic encephalopathy mimicking aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency (PMID 12200739  ).|
HMDB0000489::Aspartylglycosamine, also known as n4-(beta-N-acetyl-D-glucosaminyl)-L-asparagine or 1-beta-aspartyl-N-acetyl-D-glucosaminylamine, is a member of the class of compounds known as glycosylamines. Glycosylamines are compounds consisting of an amine with a beta-N-glycosidic bond to a carbohydrate, thus forming a cyclic hemiaminal ether bond (alpha-amino ether). Aspartylglycosamine is soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). Aspartylglycosamine can be found primarily in urine, as well as in human spleen tissue. Within the cell, aspartylglycosamine is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Moreover, aspartylglycosamine is found to be associated with aspartylglucosaminuria, which is an inborn error of metabolism. Large amount of aspartylglycosamine appears in patients with aspartylglycosaminuria corresponding to decreased activity of aspartylglycosamine amido hydrolase.|
HMDB0011134::5-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (5-HETE) is an endogenous eicosanoid. 5-HETE is an intermediate in arachidonic acid metabolism. It is converted from 5(S)-HPETE via the enzyme glutathione peroxidase (EC 1.11.1.9)and then converted to 5-OxoETE. It is also involved in the pathway of leukotriene synthesis. In addition, it is a modulator of tubuloglomerular feedback.|
HMDB0011103::1,7 dimethyluric acid is the major urinary caffeine metabolites that is produced in the human body. 1,7 dimethyluric acid is formed during metabolism of caffeine and the process is catalyzed primarily by CYP2A6. (PMID: 18715882  ).|
HMDB0001857::1,3-Dimethyluric acid is a product of theophylline metabolism in man. 1,3-Dimethyluric acid is one of the purine components in urinary calculi. Methylated purines originate from the metabolism of methylxanthines (caffeine, theophylline and theobromine). Methyluric acids are indistinguishable from uric acid by simple methods routinely used in clinical laboratories, requiring the use of high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Purine derivatives in urinary calculi could be considered markers of abnormal purine metabolism. The content of a purine derivative in stone depends on its average urinary excretion in the general population, similarity to the chemical structure of uric acid, and content of the latter in stone. This suggests that purines in stones represent a solid solution with uric acid as solvent. It is also plausible that methylxanthines, ubiquitous components of the diet and drugs, are involved in the pathogenesis of urolithiasis. Caffeine is metabolized via successive pathways mainly catalyzed by CYP1A2, xanthine oxidase or N-acetyltransferase-2 to give 14 different metabolites. CYP1A2 activity shows an inter-individual variability among the population. CYP1A2, an isoform of the CYP1A cytochrome P450 super-family, is involved in the metabolism of many drugs and plays a potentially important role in the induction of chemical carcinogenesis. (PMID: 11712316  , 15833286  , 3506820  , 15013152  , 4039734  ).|
HMDB0001991::7-Methylxanthine is a methyl derivative of xanthine, found occasionally in human urine. 7-Methylxanthine is one of the purine components in urinary calculi. Methylated purines originate from the metabolism of methylxanthines (caffeine, theophylline and theobromine). Caffeine is metabolized via successive pathways mainly catalyzed by CYP1A2, xanthine oxidase or N-acetyltransferase-2 to give 14 different metabolites, including 7-methylxanthine. CYP1A2 activity shows an inter-individual variability among the population. CYP1A2, an isoform of the CYP1A cytochrome P450 super-family, is involved in the metabolism of many drugs and plays a potentially important role in the induction of chemical carcinogenesis. Purine derivatives in urinary calculi could be considered markers of abnormal purine metabolism. The content of a purine derivative in stone depends on its average urinary excretion in the general population, similarity to the chemical structure of uric acid, and content of the latter in stone. This suggests that purines in stones represent a solid solution with uric acid as solvent. It is also plausible that methylxanthines, ubiquitous components of the diet and drugs, are involved in the pathogenesis of urolithiasis. (PMID: 11712316  , 15833286  , 3506820  , 15013152  ).|
HMDB0001886::3-Methylxanthine is a caffeine and a theophylline metabolite. (PMID 16870158  , 16678550  ). CYP1A2 probably plays a major role in theophylline 8-hydroxylation at a therapeutic concentration after the full development of CYP1A2 activity in children (after 3 years old). (PMID 9890610  ).|
HMDB0010738::1-methylxanthine is the major metabolites of caffeine in the human. The oxidation of 1-methylxanthine to 1-methyluric acid occurred so rapidly that the parent compound could not be detected in plasma, and only low concentrations could be detected in brain. (PMID: 28863020  .|
HMDB0002825::Theobromine, or 3,7-Dimethylxanthine, is the principle alkaloid in Theobroma cacao (the cacao bean) and other plants. A xanthine alkaloid that is used as a bronchodilator and as a vasodilator. It has a weaker diuretic activity than theophylline and is also a less powerful stimulant of smooth muscle. It has practically no stimulant effect on the central nervous system. It was formerly used as a diuretic and in the treatment of angina pectoris and hypertension. (From Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th ed, pp1318-9, as cited on Pubchem). Theobromine is a bitter alkaloid of the methylxanthine family, which also includes the similar compounds theophylline and caffeine. Despite its name, the compound contains no bromine. Theobromine is derived from Theobroma, the genus of the cacao tree, which is composed of the Greek roots theo ("God") and broma ("food"), meaning "food of the gods". It is the primary alkaloid found in cocoa and chocolate, and is one of the causes for chocolate's mood-elevating effects. The amount found in chocolate is small enough that chocolate can be safely consumed by humans in large quantities, but animals that metabolize theobromine more slowly, such as cats and dogs, can easily consume enough chocolate to cause chocolate poisoning. Theobromine is a stimulant frequently confused with caffeine. Theobromine has very different effects on the human body from caffeine; it is a mild, lasting stimulant with a mood improving effect, whereas caffeine has a strong, immediate effect and increases stress. In medicine, it is used as a diuretic, vasodilator, and myocardial stimulant. There is a possible association between prostate cancer and theobromine. Theobromine is a contributing factor in acid reflux because it relaxes the esophageal sphincter muscle, allowing stomach acid access to the esophagus (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0001860::1,7-dimethylxanthine (paraxanthine) is the preferential path of caffeine metabolism in humans. Paraxanthine is a dimethylxanthine compound structurally related to caffeine. Like caffeine, paraxanthine is a psychoactive central nervous system (CNS) stimulant. It possesses a potency roughly equal to that of caffeine and is likely involved in the mediation of the effects of caffeine itself.|
HMDB0001889::Theophylline is a methylxanthine drug used in therapy for respiratory diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma under a variety of brand names. As a member of the xanthine family, it bears structural and pharmacological similarity to caffeine. It is naturally found in black tea and green tea. A methyl xanthine derivative from tea with diuretic, smooth muscle relaxant, bronchial dilation, cardiac, and central nervous system stimulant activities. Theophylline inhibits the 3',5'-cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase that degrades cyclic AMP (cAMP) thus potentiating the actions of agents that act through adenylate cyclase and cAMP.|
HMDB0002123::1,3,7-Trimethyluric acid is a methyl derivative of uric acid, found occasionally in human urine. 1,3,7-Trimethyluracil is one of the purine components in urinary calculi. Methylated purines originate from the metabolism of methylxanthines (caffeine, theophylline and theobromine). Methyluric acids are indistinguishable from uric acid by simple methods routinely used in clinical laboratories, requiring the use of high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Purine derivatives in urinary calculi could be considered markers of abnormal purine metabolism. The content of a purine derivative in stone depends on its average urinary excretion in the general population, similarity to the chemical structure of uric acid, and content of the latter in stone. This suggests that purines in stones represent a solid solution with uric acid as solvent. It is also plausible that methylxanthines, ubiquitous components of the diet and drugs, are involved in the pathogenesis of urolithiasis. Caffeine is metabolized via successive pathways mainly catalyzed by CYP1A2, xanthine oxidase or N-acetyltransferase-2 to give 14 different metabolites. CYP1A2 activity shows an inter-individual variability among the population. CYP1A2, an isoform of the CYP1A cytochrome P450 super-family, is involved in the metabolism of many drugs and plays a potentially important role in the induction of chemical carcinogenesis. (PMID: 11712316  , 15833286  , 3506820  , 15013152  ).|
HMDB0001847::Caffeine is the most widely consumed psychostimulant drug in the world and is mostly consumed in the form of coffee. Whether caffeine and/or coffee consumption contributes to the development of cardiovascular disease (CVD), the single leading cause of death in the US, is unclear. The literature indicates a strong relationship between boiled, unfiltered coffee consumption and elevated cholesterol levels; however, there is a critical gap in the literature regarding the effects of coffee or caffeine consumption on fibrinogen or CRP, which is an independent predictor of CVD risk. Available studies are limited by small samples sizes, the inclusion of only men (or few women), and unrepresented age or ethnic groups. There is a critical need for controlled laboratory and epidemiological studies that include fibrinogen and CRP markers of CVD risk before conclusions can be drawn regarding the health effects of caffeine and/or coffee in a normal, healthy population of men and women (PMID: 16856769   ). The relationship between caffeine consumption and various illnesses such as cardiovascular disease and cancer remains equivocal. Prudence might dictate that pregnant women and chronically ill individuals exercise restraint in their use of caffeine, although research suggests relatively low or nonexistent levels of risk associated with moderate caffeine consumption (PMID: 7844249  ).| There is extensive evidence that caffeine at dietary doses increases blood pressure (BP). However, concern that the drug may contribute to cardiovascular disease appears to have been dampened by (1) the belief that habitual use leads to the development of tolerance, and (2) confusion regarding relevant epidemiologic findings. When considered comprehensively, findings from experimental and epidemiologic studies converge to show that BP remains reactive to the pressor effects of caffeine in the diet. Overall, the impact of dietary caffeine on population BP levels is likely to be modest, probably in the region of 4/2 mm Hg. At these levels, however, population studies of BP indicate that caffeine use could account for premature deaths in the region of 14% for coronary heart disease and 20% for stroke (PMID: 14747639  ).| Caffeine is a purine alkaloid that occurs naturally in coffee beans. At intake levels associated with coffee consumption, caffeine appears to exert most of its biological effects through the antagonism of the A1 and A2A subtypes of the adenosine receptor. Adenosine is an endogenous neuromodulator with mostly inhibitory effects, and adenosine antagonism by caffeine results in effects that are generally stimulatory. Some physiological effects associated with caffeine administration include central nervous system stimulation, acute elevation of blood pressure, increased metabolic rate, and diuresis. Caffeine is rapidly and almost completely absorbed in the stomach and small intestine and distributed to all tissues, including the brain. Caffeine metabolism occurs primarily in the liver, where the activity of the cytochrome P450 isoform CYP1A2 accounts for almost 95% of the primary metabolism of caffeine. CYP1A2-catalyzed 3-demethylation of caffeine results in the formation of 1,7-dimethylxanthine (paraxanthine). Paraxanthine may be demethylated by CYP1A2 to form 1-methylxanthine, which may be oxidized to 1-methyluric acid by xanthine oxidase. Paraxanthine may also be hydroxylated by CYP2A6 to form 1,7-dimethyluric acid, or acetylated by N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) to form 5-acetylamino-6-formylamino-3-methyluracil, an unstable compound that may be deformylated nonenzymatically to form 5-acetylamino-6-amino-3-methyluracil.| Caffeine concentrations in coffee beverages can be quite variable. A standard cup of coffee is often assumed to provide 100 mg of caffeine, but a recent analysis of 14 different specialty coffees purchased at coffee shops in the US found that the amount of caffeine in 8 oz (=240 ml) of brewed coffee ranged from 72 to 130 mg. Caffeine in espresso coffees ranged from 58 to 76 mg in a single shot (PMID: 16507475  ). Caffeine is a member of the methylxanthine family of drugs, and is the most widely consumed behaviourally active substance in the western world. A number of in vitro and in vivo studies have demonstrated that caffeine modulates both innate and adaptive immune responses. For instance, studies indicate that caffeine and its major metabolite paraxanthine suppress neutrophil and monocyte chemotaxis, and also suppress production of the pro-inflammatory cytokine tumour necrosis factor (TNF) alpha from human blood. Caffeine has also been reported to suppress human lymphocyte function as indicated by reduced T-cell proliferation and impaired production of Th1 (interleukin [IL]-2 and interferon [IFN]-gamma), Th2 (IL-4, IL-5), and Th3 (IL-10) cytokines. Studies also indicate that caffeine suppresses antibody production. The evidence suggests that at least some of the immunomodulatory actions of caffeine are mediated via inhibition of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)-phosphodiesterase (PDE) and consequential increase in intracellular cAMP concentrations. Overall, these studies indicate that caffeine, like other members of the methylxanthine family, is largely anti-inflammatory in nature, and based on the pharmacokinetics of caffeine, many of its immunomodulatory effects occur at concentrations that are relevant to normal human consumption (PMID: 16540173  ).|
HMDB0010199::11b-PGF2a is an intermediate metabolite in the arachadonic acid metabolic pathway. 11b-PGF2 is irreversibly produced from prostaglandin D2 via the enzyme prostaglandin-F synthase [EC:1.1.1.188].(KEGG)Prostaglandins are eicosanoids. The eicosanoids consist of the prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), leukotrienes (LTs) and lipoxins (LXs). The PGs and TXs are collectively identified as prostanoids. Prostaglandins were originally shown to be synthesized in the prostate gland, thromboxanes from platelets (thrombocytes) and leukotrienes from leukocytes, hence the derivation of their names. All mammalian cells except erythrocytes synthesize eicosanoids. These molecules are extremely potent, able to cause profound physiological effects at very dilute concentrations. All eicosanoids function locally at the site of synthesis, through receptor-mediated G-protein linked signaling pathways.|
HMDB0001885::3-Chlorotyrosine, a specific marker of myeloperoxidase-catalyzed oxidation, is markedly elevated in low density lipoprotein isolated from human atherosclerotic intima. (PMID 9151778  ). In particular, myeloperoxidase halogenates tyrosine residues in plasma proteins and and generates 3-chlorotyrosine (CY). The detection of free chlorotyrosine in blood or urine arises from the degradation of these chlorinated proteins. CY concentrations may be useful for monitoring the activation of neutrophils in asthmatic patients (PMID 15196282  ).|
HMDB0011174::Isoleucylproline is a dipeptide composed of phenylalanine and proline. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. It is found in urine (PMID: 3782411  ).|
HMDB0000797::SAICAR (or (S)-2-[5-amino-1-(5-phospho-D-ribosyl)imidazole-4-carboxamido]succinate) is a substrate for the multifunctional protein ADE2. SAICAR is an intermediate in purine metabolism. SAICAR is converted from 5-amino-1-(5-phospho-D-ribosyl) imidazole-4-carboxylate via phosphoribosylaminoimidazole-succinocarboxamide synthase (EC: 6.3.2.6) or SAICAR synthase. This enzyme catalyses the seventh step out of ten in the biosynthesis of purine nucleotides. The appearance of succinylaminoimidazolecarboxamide riboside (SAICAriboside) and succinyladenosine (S-Ado) in cerebrospinal fluid, in urine, and, to a lesser extent, in plasma is characteristic of a heritable deficiency known as adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency. Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency is responsible for a range of symptoms that involve psychomotor retardation, often accompanied by epileptic seizures, and autistic features. When present in sufficiently high levels, SAICAR can act as an oncometabolite, a metabotoxin, and an acidogen. An oncometabolite is a compound that promotes tumour growth and survival. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. As an oncometabolite, high levels of SAICAR stimulate pyruvate kinase isoform M2 and promote cancer cell survival in glucose-limited conditions such as aerobic glycolysis (PMID: 23086999  ). As an organic acid, SAICAR is associated with acidosis. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart, liver, and kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of untreated adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development.|
HMDB0062179::AICA-riboside, also known as acadesine or AICAR, is an AMP-activated protein kinase activator which is used for the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia and may have applications in treating other disorders such as diabetes. AICA-riboside is an adenosine regulating agent developed by PeriCor Therapeutics and licensed to Schering-Plough in 2007 for phase III studies. The drug is a potential first-in-class agent for prevention of reperfusion injury in CABG surgery. Schering began patient enrollment in phase III studies in May, 2009. The trial was terminated in late 2010 based on an interim futility analysis (Wikipedia). AICA-riboside is a minor constituent found in human milk (PMID: 7702711  ).|
HMDB0000108::Ethanol is a clear, colorless liquid rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and distributed throughout the body. It has bactericidal activity and is used often as a topical disinfectant. It is widely used as a solvent and preservative in pharmaceutical preparations as well as serving as the primary ingredient in alcoholic beverages. Indeed, ethanol has widespread use as a solvent of substances intended for human contact or consumption, including scents, flavorings, colorings, and medicines. Ethanol has a depressive effect on the central nervous system and because of its psychoactive effects, it is considered a drug. Ethanol has a complex mode of action and affects multiple systems in the brain, most notably it acts as an agonist to the GABA receptors. Death from ethanol consumption is possible when blood alcohol level reaches 0.4%. A blood level of 0.5% or more is commonly fatal. Levels of even less than 0.1% can cause intoxication, with unconsciousness often occurring at 0.3-0.4 %.| Ethanol is metabolized by the body as an energy-providing carbohydrate nutrient, as it metabolizes into acetyl CoA, an intermediate common with glucose metabolism, that can be used for energy in the citric acid cycle or for biosynthesis. Ethanol within the human body is converted into acetaldehyde by alcohol dehydrogenase and then into acetic acid by acetaldehyde dehydrogenase. The product of the first step of this breakdown, acetaldehyde, is more toxic than ethanol. Acetaldehyde is linked to most of the clinical effects of alcohol. It has been shown to increase the risk of developing cirrhosis of the liver,[77] multiple forms of cancer, and alcoholism. Industrially, ethanol is produced both as a petrochemical, through the hydration of ethylene, and biologically, by fermenting sugars with yeast. Small amounts of ethanol are endogenously produced by gut microflora through anaerobic fermentation. However most ethanol detected in biofluids and tissues likely comes from consumption of alcoholic beverages. Absolute ethanol or anhydrous alcohol generally refers to purified ethanol, containing no more than one percent water. Absolute alcohol is not intended for human consumption. It often contains trace amounts of toxic benzene (used to remove water by azeotropic distillation). Consumption of this form of ethanol can be fatal over a short time period. Generally absolute or pure ethanol is used as a solvent for lab and industrial settings where water will disrupt a desired reaction. Pure ethanol is classed as 200 proof in the USA and Canada, equivalent to 175 degrees proof in the UK system. Ethanol is a general biomarker for the consumption of alcohol|
HMDB0000228::Phenol, is a toxic, colourless crystalline solid with a sweet tarry odor that resembles a hospital smell. It is commonly used as an antiseptic and disinfectant. It is active against a wide range of micro-organisms including some fungi and viruses, but is only slowly effective against spores. It has been used to disinfect skin and to relieve itching. Phenol is also used in the preparation of cosmetics including sunscreens, hair dyes, and skin lightening preparations. It is also used in the production of drugs (it is the starting material in the industrial production of aspirin), weedkillers, and synthetic resins. Phenol can be found in areas with high levels of motor traffic, therefore, people living in crowded urban areas are frequently exposed to traffic-derived phenol vapor. The average (mean +/- SD) phenol concentration in urine among normal individuals living in urban areas is 7.4 +/- 2.2 mg/g of creatinine. Exposure of the skin to concentrated phenol solutions causes chemical burns which may be severe; in laboratories where it is used, it is usually recommended that polyethylene glycol solution is kept available for washing off splashes. Notwithstanding the effects of concentrated solutions, it is also used in cosmetic surgery as an exfoliant, to remove layers of dead skin (Wikipedia). In some bacteria phenol can be directly synthesized from tyrosine via the enzyme tyrosine phenol-lyase [EC:4.1.99.2].|
HMDB0000237::Propionic acid (PA) is widely used as an antifungal agent in food. It is present naturally at low levels in dairy products and occurs ubiquitously, together with other short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), in the gastro-intestinal tract of humans and other mammals as an end-product of the microbial digestion of carbohydrates. It has significant physiological activity in animals. PA is irritant but produces no acute systemic effects and has no demonstrable genotoxic potential. (PMID 1628870  ) Propionic aciduria is one of the most frequent organic acidurias, a disease that comprise many various disorders. The outcome of patients born with Propionic aciduria (genetic disorder) is poor intellectual development patterns, with 60% having an IQ less than 75 and requiring special education. Successful liver and/or renal transplantations, in a few patients, have resulted in better quality of life but have not necessarily prevented neurological and various visceral complications. These results emphasize the need for permanent metabolic follow-up whatever the therapeutic strategy. (PMID 15868474  ) Decreased early mortality, less severe symptoms at diagnosis, and more favorable short-term neurodevelopmental outcome were recorded in patients identified through expanded newborn screening. (PMID 16763906  ).|
HMDB0000466::3-Methylindole, or skatole, can be found as a white crystalline or fine powder solid, and it browns upon aging. It is nitrogenous and one of the rings is a pyrrole. This is probably the reason it's so foul smelling. It is soluble in alcohol and benzene and it gives violet color in potassium ferrocyanide (K4Fe(CN)6.3H2O) and sulfuric acid (H2SO4). Skatole has a double ring system which displays aromaticity that comes from the lone pair electrons on the nitrogen. It is continuous (all atoms in the ring are sp2 hybridized), planar, and follows the 4n+2 rule because it has 10 pi electrons. It can be synthesized through a Fischer indole synthesis which was developed by Emil Fischer.In a 1994 report released by five top cigarette companies, skatole was listed as one of the 599 additives to cigarettes. It is a flavoring ingredient. 3-Methylindole is a mildly toxic white crystalline organic compound with chemical formula C9H9N and CAS number 83-34-1. The compound belongs to the indole family and has a methyl substituent in position 3 of the indole ring. It occurs naturally in feces (it is produced from tryptophan in the mammalian digestive tract), beets, and coal tar, and has a strong fecal odor. In low concentrations it has a flowery smell and is found in several flowers and essential oils, including those of orange blossoms, jasmine, and Ziziphus mauritiana. It is used as a fragrance and fixative in many perfumes and as an aroma compound. Its name is derived from skato, the Greek word for dung.|
HMDB0000474::Butanone occurs as a natural product. It is made by some trees and found in some fruits and vegetables in small amounts. It is also released to the air from car and truck exhausts. The known health effects to people from exposure to butanone are irritation of the nose, throat, skin, and eyes. (wikipedia).|
HMDB0000535::Caproic acid is a colourless oily liquid that smells like cheese. It is a fatty acid found naturally in various animal fats and oils. Caproic acid is a medium chain triglyceride (MCT). MCTs are widely used for parenteral nutrition in individuals requiring supplemental nutrition, and are being more widely used in foods, drugs, and cosmetics (MCTs are essentially non-toxic). It is safe for human dietary consumption up to levels of 1g/kg (PMID: 10685018  ). Caproic acid is found to be associated with medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000666::Heptanoic acid, also called enanthic acid, is an organic compound composed of a seven-carbon chain terminating in a carboxylic acid. It is an oily liquid with an unpleasant, rancid odor. It contributes to the odor of some rancid oils. It is slightly soluble in water, but well soluble in ethanol and ether.|
HMDB0000718::Isovaleric acid, is a natural fatty acid found in a wide variety of plants and essential oils. Isovaleric acid is clear colorless liquid that is sparingly soluble in water, but well soluble in most common organic solvents. It has been suggested that isovaleric acid from pilot whales, a species frequently consumed in the Faroe Islands, may be the unusual dietary factor in prolonged gestation in the population of the Faroe Islands. Previous studies suggested that was due to the high intake of n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids has been, but fatty acid data for eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexanoic acid (DHA) in blood lipids of Faroese and Norwegians was reviewed in terms of the type of fish eaten (mostly lean white fish with DHA much greater than EPA); the popular lean fish, thus, probably provides too little EPA to produce a marked effect on human biochemistry (PMID 2646392  ). Isovaleric acid is found to be associated with isovaleric acidemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000738::Indole is an aromatic heterocyclic organic compound. It has a bicyclic structure, consisting of a six-membered benzene ring fused to a five-membered nitrogen-containing pyrrole ring. It can be produced by bacteria as a degradation product of the amino acid tryptophan. It occurs naturally in human feces and has an intense fecal smell. At very low concentrations, however, it has a flowery smell, and is a constituent of many flower scents (such as orange blossoms) and perfumes. Natural jasmine oil, used in the perfume industry, contains around 2.5% of indole. Indole also occurs in coal tar. The participation of the nitrogen lone electron pair in the aromatic ring means that indole is not a base, and it does not behave like a simple amine.|
HMDB0000753::, also known as 3-oxohexane or hexan-3-one, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as ketones. These are organic compounds in which a carbonyl group is bonded to two carbon atoms R2C=O (neither R may be a hydrogen atom). Ketones that have one or more alpha-hydrogen atoms undergo keto-enol tautomerization, the tautomer being an enol. Thus, is considered to be an oxygenated hydrocarbon lipid molecule. exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. can be biosynthesized from hexane. is a sweet, ether, and fruity tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as peach, pepper (spice), enokitake, and vanilla. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0000798::Oenanthic ether, also known as ethyl enanthate or grape oil, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty acid esters. These are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. Thus, oenanthic ether is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. Oenanthic ether exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Oenanthic ether has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, oenanthic ether is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Oenanthic ether exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Oenanthic ether can be biosynthesized from heptanoic acid. Oenanthic ether is a cognac, fruity, and melon tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as pulses, cereals and cereal products, milk and milk products, and fishes. This makes oenanthic ether a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0000892::Valeric acid, or pentanoic acid, is a straight chain alkyl carboxylic acid with the chemical formula CH3(CH2)3COOH. Like other low molecular weight carboxylic acids, it has a very unpleasant odor. It is found naturally in the perennial flowering plant valerian (Valeriana officinalis), from which it gets its name. Its primary use is in the synthesis of its esters. Volatile esters of valeric acid tend to have pleasant odors and are used in perfumes and cosmetics. Ethyl valerate and pentyl valerate are used as food additives because of their fruity flavors.|
HMDB0001140::Caprylaldehyde, also known as 1-octylaldehyde or aldehyde c-8, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as medium-chain aldehydes. These are an aldehyde with a chain length containing between 6 and 12 carbon atoms. Thus, caprylaldehyde is considered to be a fatty aldehyde lipid molecule. Caprylaldehyde exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Caprylaldehyde has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, caprylaldehyde is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). Caprylaldehyde exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Caprylaldehyde is an aldehydic, citrus, and fat tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as loganberry, peanut, elliott's blueberry, and teff. This makes caprylaldehyde a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. Caprylaldehyde has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0001183::Octanol occurs naturally in the form of esters in some essential oils. Octanol and water are immiscible. The distribution of a compound between water and octanol is used to calculate the partition coefficient (logP) of that molecule. Water/octanol partitioning is a good approximation of the partitioning between the cytosol and lipid membranes of living systems.(wikipedia). A colorless, slightly viscous liquid used as a defoaming or wetting agent. It is also used as a solvent for protective coatings, waxes, and oils, and as a raw material for plasticizers. (From McGraw-Hill Dictionary of Scientific and Technical Terms, 5th ed). It is also one of many compounds derived from tobacco and tobacco smoke and shown to increase the permeability of the membranes of human lung fibroblasts (PMID 7466833  ).|
HMDB0001485::One of the isomers, 2,2,4-trimethylpentane or isooctane, is of major importance, as it has been selected as the 100 point on the octane rating scale, with n-heptane as the zero point. Octane ratings are ratings used to represent the anti-knock performance of petroleum-based fuels (octane is less likely to prematurely combust under pressure than heptane), given as the percentage of 2,2,4-trimethylpentane in an 2,2,4-trimethylpentane / n-heptane mixture that would have the same performance. It is an important constituent of gasoline. Octane is an alkane with the chemical formula C8H18. It has 18 isomers.|
HMDB0001505::Toxic, volatile, flammable liquid hydrocarbon biproduct of coal distillation. Chronic benzene exposure produces hematotoxicity, bone marrow dysplasia (Displasia is a pre-neoplastic or pre-cancerous change). (PMID 16183116  ). It is used as an industrial solvent in paints, varnishes, lacquer thinners, gasoline, etc. Benzene causes central nervous system damage acutely and is carcinogenic. It was formerly used as parasiticide.|
HMDB0001858::p-Cresol (4-methylphenol), a 108.1 Da volatile low-molecular-weight compound, is a phenol. It is a partially lipophilic moiety which strongly binds to plasma protein (close to 100%) under normal conditions. p-Cresol is metabolized through conjugation, mainly sulphation and glucuronization, but removal of the unconjugated p-cresol is, at least in part, via the urine. Therefore it is not surprising that this compound, together with several other phenoles, is retained when the kidneys fail. P-Cresol is an end-product of protein breakdown, and an increase of the nutritional protein load in healthy individuals results in enhanced generation and urinary excretion. The serum p-cresol concentration in uremic patients can be decreased by changing to a low-protein diet. p-Cresol is one of the metabolites of the amino acid tyrosine, and to a certain extent also of phenylalanine, which are converted to 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid by intestinal bacteria, before being decarboxylated to p-cresol (putrefaction). The main contributing bacteria are aerobes (mainly enterobacteria), but to a certain extent also anaerobes play a role (mainly Clostridium perfringens). In uremia, modifications in the intestinal flora result in the specific overgrowth of bacteria that are specific p-cresol producers. The administration of antibiotics reduces urinary excretion of p-cresol, as a result of the liquidation of the producing bacteria. Environmental factors might also contribute. The liver cytochrome P450 metabolizes toluene to benzyl alcohol, but also to o-cresol and p-cresol.| Toluene is not only used industrially, but it is also the most widely abusively inhaled solvent. Furthermore, p-cresol is a metabolite of menthofuran, one of the metabolites of R-(+)-pulegone, which is found in extracts from the plants Mentha pulegium and Hedeoma pulegioides, commonly known as pennyroyal oil and pennyroyal tea. These extracts are popular as unconventional herbal therapeutic agents and are applied as abortiva, diaphoretics, emmenagogues, and psychedelic drugs. Pennyroyal oil is extensively used for its pleasant mint-like smell in the flavoring industry. The toxicity of pennyroyal oil and menthofuran is well known. Another compound used in traditional medicine, especially in Japan, which is a precursor of p-cresol is wood tar creosote. p-Cresol has been reported to affect several biochemical, biological and physiological functions: (i) it diminishes the oxygen uptake of rat cerebral cortex slices; (ii) it increases the free active drug concentration of warfarin and diazepam; (iii) it has been related to growth retardation in the weanling pig; (iv) it alters cell membrane permeability, at least in bacteria; (v) it induces LDH leakage from rat liver slices; (vi) it induces susceptibility to auditive epileptic crises; and (vii) it blocks cell K+ channels. (PMID: 10570076  ). p-Cresol is a uremic toxin that is at least partially removed by peritoneal dialysis in haemodialysis patients, and has been involved in the progression of renal failure. (MID: 11169029). At concentrations encountered during uremia, p-cresol inhibits phagocyte function and decreases leukocyte adhesion to cytokine-stimulated endothelial cells. (PMID: 14681860  ).|
HMDB0002176::Ethylmethylacetic acid is a carboxylic acid found in low amounts in normal humans (PMID 3372640  ). It has been described in the urine of individuals with 2-ethylhydracrylic aciduria associated with short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (due to ACADSB gene mutations, OMIM 600301  ) (PMID 15615815  ).|
HMDB0002939::Methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK) is an organic solvent. MIBK is among the top ten most popular organic solvents used in industry. MIBK is occasionally found as a volatile component of urine. MIBK in urine is considered as a biological marker of occupational exposure to this solvent. Olfactory perception is significant but adaptation may occur. The typical toxicity effects of MIBK in humans exposed at 50 to 100 ppm are mucous membrane irritation and weak effects on the central nervous system (CNS) such as headache. Visual dysfunction has been reported in workers exposed to a mixture of organic solvents containing MIBK. Memory impairment was detected in clinical observation on a 44-year-old man who had been exposed to MIBK at 100 ppm for more than 10 years. Regarding to the route of absorption, skin penetration of MIBK is substantial. (PMID: 12592578  , 17485256  , 16464817  , 5556886  ).|
HMDB0003375::The monoterpene d-limonene is a naturally occurring chemical which is the major component in oil of orange. Currently, d-limonene is widely used as a flavor and fragrance and is listed to be generally recognized as safe in food by the Food and Drug Administration (21 CFR 182.60 in the Code of Federal Regulations, U.S.A.). Recently, however, d-limonene has been shown to cause a male rat-specific kidney toxicity referred to as hyaline droplet nephropathy. Furthermore, chronic exposure to d-limonene causes a significant incidence of renal tubular tumors exclusively in male rats. Although d-limonene is not carcinogenic in female rats or male and female mice given much higher dosages, the male rat-specific nephrocarcinogenicity of d-limonene may raise some concern regarding the safety of d-limonene for human consumption. A considerable body of scientific data has indicated that the renal toxicity of d-limonene results from the accumulation of a protein, alpha 2u-globulin, in male rat kidney proximal tubule lysosomes. This protein is synthesized exclusively by adult male rats. Other species, including humans, synthesize proteins that share significant homology with alpha 2u-globulin. However, none of these proteins, including the mouse equivalent of alpha 2u-globulin, can produce this toxicity, indicating a unique specificity for alpha 2u-globulin. With chronic exposure to d-limonene, the hyaline droplet nephropathy progresses and the kidney shows tubular cell necrosis, granular cast formation at the corticomedullary junction, and compensatory cell proliferation. Both d-limonene and cis-d-limonene-1,2-oxide (the major metabolite involved in this toxicity) are negative in vitro mutagenicity screens. Therefore, the toxicity-related renal cell proliferation is believed to be integrally involved in the carcinogenicity of d-limonene as persistent elevations in renal cell proliferation may increase fixation of spontaneously altered DNA or serve to promote spontaneously initiated cells.| The scientific data base demonstrates that the tumorigenic activity of d-limonene in male rats is not relevant to humans. The three major lines of evidence supporting the human safety of d-limonene are (1) the male rat specificity of the nephrotoxicity and carcinogenicity; (2) the pivotal role that alpha 2u-globulin plays in the toxicity, as evidenced by the complete lack of toxicity in other species despite the presence of structurally similar proteins; and (3) the lack of genotoxicity of both d-limonene and d-limonene-1,2-oxide, supporting the concept of a nongenotoxic mechanism, namely, sustained renal cell proliferation. (PMID: 2024047  ).|
HMDB0004814::Is a volatile organic ketone found in almost all urine samples of normal individuals. (PMID 15996539  ). It has been hypothesized that arises from in vivo beta-oxidation of 2-ethylhexanoic acid (EHA) from plasticizers, similar to formation of 3-heptanone from valproic acid. (PMID 11282094  ).|
HMDB0005812::Geraniol, also called rhodinol, is a monoterpenoid and an alcohol. It is the primary part of oil-of-rose and palmarosa oil. It also occurs in small quantities in geranium, lemon, citronella, and many other essential oils. It appears as a clear to pale-yellow oil which is insoluble in water, but soluble in most common organic solvents. It has a rose-like odor, for which it is commonly used in perfumes. It is used in flavors such as peach, raspberry, grapefruit, red apple, plum, lime, orange, lemon, watermelon, pineapple and blueberry. An alternate application has been found in the use of insect repellents or deterrants. Though it may repel mosquitoes, flies, lice, cockroaches, ants, and ticks, it is also produced by the scent glands of honey bees to help them mark nectar-bearing flowers and locate the entrances to their hives. Extensive testing by Dr. Jerry Butler at the University of Florida has shown geraniol to be one of nature's most effective insect repellents (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0005879::Dimethyldisulfide is a volatile organic compound. Methyl disulfide is occasionally found as a volatile component of normal human breath and biofluids. Dimethyldisulfide is one of the representative volatile components found in oral malodor. Dimethyldisulfide concentrations in breath is a practical noninvasive way to assess recent exposure to sulfur compounds in sulfate pulp mills, and therefore it should be applicable to workplaces contaminated. (PMID: 5556886  , 14691119  , 11236158  , 8481097  ).|
HMDB0006115::Benzaldehyde is occasionally found as a volatile component of urine. Benzaldehyde is an aromatic aldehyde used in cosmetics as a denaturant, a flavoring agent, and as a fragrance. Currently used in only seven cosmetic products, its highest reported concentration of use was 0.5% in perfumes. Benzaldehyde is a generally regarded as safe (GRAS) food additive in the United States and is accepted as a flavoring substance in the European Union. Because Benzaldehyde rapidly metabolizes to Benzoic Acid in the skin, the available dermal irritation and sensitization data demonstrating no adverse reactions to Benzoic Acid were considered supportive of the safety of Benzaldehyde. Benzaldehyde is absorbed through skin and by the lungs, distributes to all well-perfused organs, but does not accumulate in any specific tissue type. After being metabolized to benzoic acid, conjugates are formed with glycine or glucuronic acid, and excreted in the urine. Several studies have suggested that Benzaldehyde can have carcinostatic or antitumor properties. Overall, at the concentrations used in cosmetics, Benzaldehyde was not considered a carcinogenic risk to humans. Although there are limited irritation and sensitization data available for Benzaldehyde, the available dermal irritation and sensitization data and ultraviolet (UV) absorption and phototoxicity data demonstrating no adverse reactions to Benzoic Acid support the safety of Benzaldehyde as currently used in cosmetic products. (PMID: 16835129  , Int J Toxicol. 2006;25 Suppl 1:11-27.).|
HMDB0006236::Phenylacetaldehyde is one important oxidation-related aldehyde. Exposure to styrene gives phenylacetaldehyde as a secondary metabolite. Styrene has been implicated as reproductive toxicant, neurotoxicant, or carcinogen in vivo or in vitro. Phenylacetaldehyde could be formed by diverse thermal reactions during the cooking process together with C8 compounds is identified as a major aroma- active compound in cooked pine mushroom. Phenylacetaldehyde is readily oxidized to phenylacetic acid. Therefore will eventually be hydrolyzed and oxidized to yield phenylacetic acid that will be excreted primarily in the urine in conjugated form. (PMID: 16910727  , 7818768  , 15606130  ).|
HMDB0006483::D-Aspartic acid is the D-isomer of aspartic acid. Since its discovery in invertebrates, free D-aspartate (D-Asp) has been identified in a variety of organisms, including microorganisms, plants, and lower animals, mammals and humans. D-Asp in mammalian tissues is present in specific cells, indicating the existence of specific molecular components that regulate D-Asp levels and localization in tissues. In the rat adrenal medulla, D-Asp is closely associated with adrenaline-cells (A-cells), which account for approximately 80% of the total number of chromaffin cells in the tissue, and which make and store adrenaline. D-Asp appears to be absent from noradrenaline-cells (NA-cells), which comprise approximately 20% of the total number of chromaffin cells in the adrenal medulla, and which make and store noradrenaline. D-aspartate oxidase (EC 1.4.3.1, D-AspO), which catalyzes oxidative deamination of D-Asp, appears to be present only in NA-cells, suggesting that the lack of D-Asp in these cells is due to D-Asp oxidase-mediated metabolism of D-Asp. In the rat adrenal cortex, the distribution of D-Asp changes during development. It has been suggested that developmental changes in the localization of D-Asp reflects the participation of D-Asp in the development and maturation of steroidogenesis in rat adrenal cortical cells. D-Asp is involved in steroid hormone synthesis and secretion in mammals as well. D-Asp is synthesized intracellularly, most likely by Asp racemase (EC 5.1.1.13). Endogenous D-Asp apparently has two different intracellular localization patterns: cytoplasmic and vesicular.| D-Asp (D-aspartate) release can occur through three distinct pathways: 1) spontaneous, continuous release of cytoplasmic D-Asp, which is not associated with a specific stimulus; 2) release of cytoplasmic D-Asp via a volume-sensitive organic anion channel that connects the cytoplasm and extracellular space; 3) exocytotic discharge of vesicular D-Asp. D-Asp can be released via a mechanism that involves the L-Glu transporter. D-Asp is thus apparently in dynamic flux at the cellular level to carry out its physiological function(s) in mammals. (PMID: 16755369  ).|
HMDB0013036::Amyl alcohol is an organic compound with the formula C5H12O. All eight isomers of amyl alcohol are known:; It is a colourless liquid of density 0.8247 g/cm3 (0 oC), boiling at 131.6 oC, slightly soluble in water, easily soluble in organic solvents. It possesses a characteristic strong smell and a sharp burning taste. When pure, it is nontoxic, while the impure product is toxic. On passing its vapour through a red-hot tube, it decomposes with production of acetylene, ethylene, propylene, and other compounds. It is oxidized by chromic acid to isovaleraldehyde, and it forms crystalline addition compounds with calcium chloride and tin(IV) chloride. The other amyl alcohols may be obtained synthetically. Of these, tertiary butyl carbinol has been the most difficult to obtain, its synthesis having first been reported in 1891, by L. Tissier (Comptes Rendus, 1891, 112, p. 1065) by the reduction of a mixture of trimethyl acetic acid and trimethylacetyl chloride with sodium amalgam. It is a solid that melts at 48 to 50 oC and boils at 112.3 oC.|
HMDB0013780::Dimethyl trisulfide (DMTS) is an organic chemical compound and the simplest organic trisulfide. It is a flammable liquid with a foul odor, which is detectable at levels as low as 1 part per trillion. Dimethyl trisulfide has been found in volatiles emitted from cooked onion, leek and other Allium species, from broccoli and cabbage, as well as from Limburger cheese, and is involved in the unpalatable aroma of aged beer and stale Japanese sake. It is a decomposition product from bacterial decomposition, including from the early stages of human decomposition, and is a major attractant for blowflies looking for hosts. Dimethyl trisulfide along with dimethyl sulfide and dimethyl disulfide have been confirmed as volatile compounds given off by the fly-attracting plant known as dead-horse arum (Helicodiceros muscivorus). These flies are attracted to the odor of fetid meat and help pollinate this plant. DMTS contributes to the foul odor given off by the fungus Phallus impudicus, also known as the common stinkhorn. DMTS causes the characteristic malodorous smell of a fungating lesion, e.g., from cancer wounds, and contributes to the odor of human feces. Dimethyldisulfide is a volatile organic compound. Methyl disulfide is occasionally found as a volatile component of normal human breath and biofluids. Dimethyldisulfide is one of the representative volatile components found in oral malodor. Dimethyldisulfide concentrations in breath is a practical noninvasive way to assess recent exposure to sulfur compounds in sulfate pulp mills, and therefore it should be applicable to workplaces contaminated.  (PMID: 5556886  , 14691119  , 11236158  , 8481097  ).|
HMDB0013825::4-(1,1,3,3-Tetramethylbutyl)-phenol is manufactured via a catalytic reaction of phenol with diisobutylene. It is a member of the class of compounds known as phenylpropanes. Phenylpropanes are organic compounds that contain a phenylpropane moiety. 4-(1,1,3,3-Tetramethylbutyl)-phenol can be found primarily in feces and urine. Within the cell, 4-(1,1,3,3-Tetramethylbutyl)-phenol is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). It is a non-carcinogenic (not listed by IARC) potentially toxic compound. 4-(1,1,3,3-Tetramethylbutyl)-phenol is biodegradable, and in the surface layer of natural waters, 30% of OP can be degraded within one day. 4-(1,1,3,3-Tetramethylbutyl)-phenol is acutely very toxic to aquatic organisms and may cause long-term adverse effects in the aquatic environment. It is not acutely toxic to human health, but it is slightly irritating to the skin and highly irritating to the eyes. It is not genotoxic, but it may cause depigmentation of the skin. 4-(1,1,3,3-Tetramethylbutyl)-phenol is used as a food additive (EAFUS: Everything Added to Food in the United States).|
HMDB0029596::Chloroform is found in spearmint. Indirect food additive arising from adhesives and polymers Chloroform is a common solvent in the laboratory because it is relatively unreactive, miscible with most organic liquids, and conveniently volatile. Chloroform is used as a solvent in the pharmaceutical industry and for producing dyes and pesticides. Chloroform is an effective solvent for alkaloids in their base form and thus plant material is commonly extracted with chloroform for pharmaceutical processing. For example, it is commercially used to extract morphine from poppies and scopolamine from Datura plants. Chloroform containing deuterium (heavy hydrogen), CDCl3, is a common solvent used in NMR spectroscopy. It can be used to bond pieces of acrylic glass (also known under the trade names Perspex and Plexiglas). Chloroform is a solvent of phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol 25:24:1 is used to dissolve non-nucleic acid biomolecules in DNA and RNA extractions. Chloroform is the organic compound with formula CHCl3. It does not undergo combustion in air, although it will burn when mixed with more flammable substances. It is a member of a group of compounds known as trihalomethanes. Chloroform has myriad uses as a reagent and a solvent. It is also considered an environmental hazard. Several million tons are produced annually. The output of this process is a mixture of the four chloromethanes: chloromethane, dichloromethane, chloroform (trichloromethane), and carbon tetrachloride, which are then separated by distillation|
HMDB0029980::, also known as N-hexyl ethanoate or hexyl acetic acid, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbon atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or an aryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group). Thus, is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. can be biosynthesized from hexan-1-ol. is a sweet, apple, and banana tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as soy bean, alcoholic beverages, broccoli, and roman camomile. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0031207::Methyl pentanoate is found in alcoholic beverages. Methyl pentanoate is present in baked potato, red chilli (Capsicum frutescens), wines, coffee, black tea, honey, olive, Bourbon vanilla, melon, papaya, pineapple and other fruits. Methyl pentanoate is a flavouring agent|
HMDB0031217::Ethyl acetate is found in alcoholic beverages. Ethyl acetate is found in cereal crops, radishes, fruit juices, beer, wine, spirits etc. and produced by Anthemis nobilis (Roman chamomile) and Rubus species Ethyl acetate is used in artificial fruit essences. Ethyl acetate is used as a solvent in the manufacture of modified hop extract and decaffeinated tea or coffee. Also used for colour and inks used to mark fruit or vegetables.In the field of entomology, ethyl acetate is an effective asphyxiant for use in insect collecting and study. In a killing jar charged with ethyl acetate, the vapors will kill the collected (usually adult) insect quickly without destroying it. Because it is not hygroscopic, ethyl acetate also keeps the insect soft enough to allow proper mounting suitable for a collection|
HMDB0031417::2,6-Dimethyl-4-heptanone, also known as isobutyl N-propyl ketone or dibk, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as ketones. These are organic compounds in which a carbonyl group is bonded to two carbon atoms R2C=O (neither R may be a hydrogen atom). Ketones that have one or more alpha-hydrogen atoms undergo keto-enol tautomerization, the tautomer being an enol. 2,6-Dimethyl-4-heptanone exists as a liquid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. 2,6-Dimethyl-4-heptanone has been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, 2,6-dimethyl-4-heptanone is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). 2,6-Dimethyl-4-heptanone has a banana, fruity, and green taste. 2,6-Dimethyl-4-heptanone is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0031479::1-Heptanol is found in alcoholic beverages. 1-Heptanol is found in a few essential oils, e.g. Rosa rugosa. Also present in roasted peanut, roasted filbert, plum brandy, rice bran, cooked rice, peated malt, Bourbon vanilla, banana, morello cherry, orange, guava fruit, pineapple and plum. 1-Heptanol is a flavouring ingredient.1-Heptanol is an alcohol with a seven carbon chain and the structural formula of CH3(CH2)6OH. It is a clear colorless liquid that is very slightly soluble in water, but miscible with ether and ethanol|
HMDB0031481::, also known as 3-heptanol or 3-hydroxyheptane, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as secondary alcohols. Secondary alcohols are compounds containing a secondary alcohol functional group, with the general structure HOC(R)(R') (R,R'=alkyl, aryl). Thus, is considered to be a fatty alcohol lipid molecule. is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak acidic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Outside of the human body, can be found in fruits and herbs and spices. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0031523::Methyl acetate is found in apple. Methyl acetate is a flavouring ingredient. Methyl acetate is present in grape, banana and other fruits Methyl acetate is an ester that is synthesized from acetic acid and methanol in the presence of strong acids such as sulfuric acid in an esterification reaction. In the presence of strong bases such as sodium hydroxide or strong acids such as hydrochloric acid or sulfuric acid it is hydrolyzed back into methanol and acetic acid, especially at elevated temperature. Methyl acetate, also known as acetic acid methyl ester or methyl ethanoate, is a clear, flammable liquid with a characteristic, not unpleasant smell like certain glues or nail polish removers. Methyl acetate has characteristics very similar to its analog ethyl acetate. Methyl acetate is used as a solvent in glues, paints, and nail polish removers, in chemical reactions, and for extractions. Methyl acetate is a non-polar (lipophilic) to weakly polar (hydrophilic) aprotic solvent. Methyl acetate has a solubility of 25% in water at room temperature. At elevated temperature its solubility in water is much higher. Methyl acetate is not stable in the presence of strong aqueous bases or acids. Methyl acetate is VOC exempt. The conversion of methyl acetate back into its components, by an acid, is a first-order reaction with respect to the ester. The reaction of methyl acetate and a base, for example sodium hydroxide, is a second-order reaction with respect to both reactants|
HMDB0032063::4-Tert-butylphenol, also known as butylphen or PTBP, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenylpropanes. These are organic compounds containing a phenylpropane moiety. 4-Tert-butylphenol exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. 4-Tert-butylphenol has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, 4-tert-butylphenol is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). 4-Tert-butylphenol can be converted into halfenprox and 2-(4-ethoxyphenyl)-2-methylpropan-1-ol. 4-Tert-butylphenol is a leather and oakmoss tasting compound that can be found in herbs and spices. This makes 4-tert-butylphenol a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product. 4-Tert-butylphenol is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0032619::1-Phenylethanol, also known as styrallyl alcohol or alpha, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as benzene and substituted derivatives. These are aromatic compounds containing one monocyclic ring system consisting of benzene. 1-Phenylethanol exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 1-Phenylethanol has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, 1-phenylethanol is primarily located in the cytoplasm.|
HMDB0033620::, also known as hexyl butanoate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty acid esters. These are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. Thus, is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. can be biosynthesized from butyric acid and hexan-1-ol. is a sweet, apple, and apple peel tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as tea, apple, passion fruit, and roman camomile. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0033676::, also known as 3-ethylbutanol, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as primary alcohols. Primary alcohols are compounds comprising the primary alcohol functional group, with the general structure RCOH (R=alkyl, aryl). Thus, is considered to be a fatty alcohol lipid molecule. is soluble (in water) and an extremely weak acidic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, is primarily located in the cytoplasm. exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans.|
HMDB0033889::Ethyl butyrate is found in apple. Ethyl butyrate is present in many fruits e.g. apple, apricot, banana, plum, tangerine etc. Ethyl butyrate is a flavouring ingredient.Ethyl butyrate, also known as ethyl butanoate, or butyric ether, is an ester with the chemical formula CH3CH2CH2COOCH2CH3, with one oxygen having a double bond. It is soluble in propylene glycol, paraffin oil and kerosene. It can be synthesized by reacting ethanol and butyric acid. This is a condensation reaction, meaning water is produced in the reaction as a byproduct.|
HMDB0033890::Methyl butyrate is found in alcoholic beverages. Methyl butyrate is found in many fruits, e.g. apple juice, apricot, blackberry, nectarine etc., also present in cheeses, butter, milk, white wine, coffee and black tea. Methyl butyrate is a flavouring ingredient.|
HMDB0033908::2-Heptanol belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty alcohols. These are aliphatic alcohols consisting of a chain of a least six carbon atoms. Thus, 2-heptanol is considered to be a fatty alcohol lipid molecule. 2-Heptanol is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak acidic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). 2-Heptanol has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, 2-heptanol is primarily located in the cytoplasm. 2-Heptanol exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Outside of the human body, 2-heptanol can be found in fruits and herbs and spices. This makes 2-heptanol a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. 2-Heptanol has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0034163::, also known as isopentyl formate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbon atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or an aryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group). Thus, is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, is primarily located in the cytoplasm. can be biosynthesized from isoamylol. has a blackcurrant, dry, and earthy taste.|
HMDB0034165::Propyl hexanoate is found in alcoholic beverages. Propyl hexanoate is a flavouring ingredient. Propyl hexanoate is a constituent  of apple, apricot, grapes, passion fruit, starfruit, mountain papaya, other fruits, cheeses and various alcoholic beverages.|
HMDB0034168::Toluene is found in allspice. Toluene is isolated from distilled tolu balsam (Myroxylon balsamum). Minor constituent of lime oil (Citrus aurantifolia).Toluene, formerly known as toluol, is a clear, water-insoluble liquid with the typical smell of paint thinners. It is an aromatic hydrocarbon that is widely used as an industrial feedstock and as a solvent. (Wikipedia|
HMDB0036574::Carbon disulfide, also known as CS2 or disulfide, carbon, belongs to the class of inorganic compounds known as other non-metal sulfides. These are inorganic compounds containing a sulfur atom of an oxidation state of -2, in which the heaviest atom bonded to the oxygen belongs to the class of other non-metals. Carbon disulfide has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, carbon disulfide is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Outside of the human body, carbon disulfide can be found in kohlrabi and shiitake. This makes carbon disulfide a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. Carbon disulfide is a potentially toxic compound. Carbon disulfide has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0037050::1-Isopropyl-2-methylbenzene, also known as O-cymol or 1-methyl-2-isopropylbenzene, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as cumenes. These are aromatic compounds containing a prop-2-ylbenzene moiety. 1-Isopropyl-2-methylbenzene exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. 1-Isopropyl-2-methylbenzene has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as saliva, feces, and urine. Within the cell, 1-isopropyl-2-methylbenzene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). Outside of the human body, 1-isopropyl-2-methylbenzene can be found in citrus. This makes 1-isopropyl-2-methylbenzene a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product.|
HMDB0039618::Propyl butyrate is found in fruits. Propyl butyrate is present in many fruits, e.g. apple, apricot, banana, melon, papaya etc., also present in Camembert and other cheeses. Propyl butyrate is a flavouring ingredient.|
HMDB0040209::Ethyl hexanoate is found in alcoholic beverages. Ethyl hexanoate is found in many fruits, clove bud, corn oil, Camembert cheese, milk, fruit brandies, sparkling wine and Bourbon vanilla. Ethyl hexanoate is used in perfumes and fruit flavours.|
HMDB0040240::2-Pentylthiophene belongs to the class of organic compounds known as heteroaromatic compounds. Heteroaromatic compounds are compounds containing an aromatic ring where a carbon atom is linked to an hetero atom. 2-Pentylthiophene is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. 2-Pentylthiophene has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, 2-pentylthiophene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). 2-Pentylthiophene exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. 2-Pentylthiophene is a sweet, cranberry, and fatty tasting compound that can be found in herbs and spices and mushrooms. This makes 2-pentylthiophene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0040297::Ethyl pentanoate is found in alcoholic beverages. Ethyl pentanoate is present in wines, Bantu beer, sake, honey, apple, banana, morello cherry, guava and other fruits. Ethyl pentanoate is a flavouring agent.Ethyl pentanoate, also commonly known as ethyl valerate, is an organic compound used in flavors. It is an ester with the molecular formula C7H14O2. This colourless liquid is poorly soluble in water but miscible with organic solvents.|
HMDB0059835::Pelargonaldehyde, also known as nonyl aldehyde, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as medium-chain aldehydes. These are an aldehyde with a chain length containing between 6 and 12 carbon atoms. Thus, pelargonaldehyde is considered to be a fatty aldehyde lipid molecule. Pelargonaldehyde exists as a liquid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Pelargonaldehyde has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, saliva, and blood. Within the cell, pelargonaldehyde is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). Pelargonaldehyde exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Pelargonaldehyde can be biosynthesized from nonanoic acid. Pelargonaldehyde is an aldehydic, citrus, and fat tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as olive, common grape, ginger, and chinese cinnamon. This makes pelargonaldehyde a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. Pelargonaldehyde is a potentially toxic compound. Pelargonaldehyde has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0059851::O-Xylene, also known as O-dimethylbenzene or O-methyltoluene, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as o-xylenes. These are aromatic compounds that contain a o-xylene moiety, which is a monocyclic benzene carrying exactly two methyl groups at the 1- and 2-positions. O-Xylene exists as a liquid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. O-Xylene has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, saliva, and blood. Within the cell, O-xylene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). O-Xylene exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. O-Xylene can be converted into 3,4-xylenol. O-Xylene is a geranium tasting compound that can be found in black walnut and papaya. This makes O-xylene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. O-Xylene is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0061851::Alpha-Copaene, also known as copaene, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as sesquiterpenoids. These are terpenes with three consecutive isoprene units. Alpha-Copaene is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Alpha-Copaene has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, Alpha-copaene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Alpha-Copaene is a spice and woody tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as common sage, corn, pepper (c. annuum), and allspice. This makes Alpha-copaene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0062511::octanoate radical is also known as Caprylic acid or Caprylate.  octanoate radical is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and acidic. Octanoate radical can be found throughout numerous foods such as Prunus (Cherry, Plum), Pineappple sages, Black raspberries, and Shallots Octanoate radical is found to be associated with medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0030028::Ethyl isovalerate is found in bilberry. Ethyl isovalerate is found in fruits and vegetables e.g. apple, banana, melon, strawberry, pineapple, blackberries and celery. Ethyl isovalerate is used in fruit aroma compositions. Ethyl isovalerate is a flavouring ingredien|
HMDB0031248::Ethyl 2-methylpropanoate is found in alcoholic beverages. Ethyl 2-methylpropanoate is present in many fruits, e.g. apple, banana, orange, wine grape, strawberry, nectarine. Ethyl 2-methylpropanoate is a flavouring agent|
HMDB0034606::, also known as hexyl propionate or fema 2576, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbon atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or an aryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group). Thus, is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). can be biosynthesized from hexan-1-ol. has a fruity, green, and melon taste.|
HMDB0036228::2-Methylpropyl hexanoate, also known as isobutyl caproate or fema 2202, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty acid esters. These are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. 2-Methylpropyl hexanoate is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. 2-Methylpropyl hexanoate has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, 2-methylpropyl hexanoate is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. 2-Methylpropyl hexanoate exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. 2-Methylpropyl hexanoate can be biosynthesized from isobutanol. 2-Methylpropyl hexanoate is a sweet, fruity, and green tasting compound that can be found in pepper (spice). This makes 2-methylpropyl hexanoate a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product.|
HMDB0039620::Butyl butyrate is found in alcoholic beverages. Butyl butyrate is present in many fruits, e.g. banana, cherry, melon, plum, also present in gruyere de comte cheese, cider, soybean etc. Butyl butyrate is used in fruit flavour compositions Butyl butyrate, or butyl butanoate, is an organic compound which is an ester formed by the condensation of butyric acid and butanol. It is a clear, colorless liquid that is insoluble in water, but miscible with ethanol and diethyl ether. Its refractive index is 1.406 at 20 Â°C.|
HMDB0062119::Hexyl pentanoic acid, also known as hexyl valerate or hexyl valeric acid, is classified as a member of the fatty acid esters. Fatty acid esters are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. Hexyl pentanoic acid is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and basic. (ChemoSummarizer)|
HMDB0094654::1-methylethyl heptanoic acid is classified as a member of the fatty acid esters. Fatty acid esters are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. 1-methylethyl heptanoic acid is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and an extremely weak basic compound. 1-methylethyl heptanoic acid can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094658::1-[2-methyl-3-(methylthio) allyl]cyclohex-2-enol is classified as a member of the tertiary alcohols. Tertiary alcohols are compounds in which a hydroxy group, -OH, is attached to a saturated carbon atom R3COH (R not H ). 1-[2-methyl-3-(methylthio) allyl]cyclohex-2-enol is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a very weak acidic compound. 1-[2-methyl-3-(methylthio) allyl]cyclohex-2-enol can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094659::1,1-dimethylethyl heptanoic acid is classified as a member of the fatty acid esters. Fatty acid esters are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. 1,1-dimethylethyl heptanoic acid is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and an extremely weak basic compound. 1,1-dimethylethyl heptanoic acid can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094660::Diethyl phthalic acid, also known as diethyl phthalate, 1,2-diethyl phthalic acid or 1,2-benzenedicarboxylic acid diethyl ester, is classified as a member of the benzoic acid esters. Benzoic acid esters are ester derivatives of benzoic acid. Diethyl phthalic acid is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and basic. This substance is commonly used to make plastics more flexible. Products in which it is found include toothbrushes, automobile parts, tools, toys, and food packaging. Diethyl phthalic acid can be released fairly easily from these products, as it is not part of the chain of chemicals (polymers) that makes up the plastic. Diethyl phthalic acid is also used in cosmetics, insecticides, and aspirin. Phthalate esters can cause reproductive and developmental toxicity. (L1900, A2883) It is a non-carcinogenic (not listed by IARC) potentially toxic compound. (ChemoSummarizer)|
HMDB0094661::1-phenyl-2-hexanone is classified as a benzene or a Benzene derivative. Benzenes are aromatic compounds containing one monocyclic ring system consisting of benzene. 1-phenyl-2-hexanone is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and an extremely weak acidic compound. 1-phenyl-2-hexanone can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094665::2,2,4,6,6-pentamethyl-3-heptene is classified as a member of the branched unsaturated hydrocarbons. Branched unsaturated hydrocarbons are hydrocarbons that contains one or more unsaturated carbon atoms, and an aliphatic branch. 2,2,4,6,6-pentamethyl-3-heptene can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094669::Methyl neopentyl phthalic acid, also known as phthalic acid, methyl neopentyl ester, is classified as a member of the benzoic acid esters. Benzoic acid esters are ester derivatives of benzoic acid. Methyl neopentyl phthalic acid is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and basic. (ChemoSummarizer)|
HMDB0094670::1,4-bis-(1,1-dimethylethyl)-benzene, also known as Para-di-tert-butylbenzene, is classified as a member of the phenylpropanes. Phenylpropanes are organic compounds containing a phenylpropane moiety. 1,4-bis-(1,1-dimethylethyl)-benzene can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094685::Hexadecyl Benzoic acid is classified as a member of the benzoic acid esters. Benzoic acid esters are ester derivatives of benzoic acid. Hexadecyl Benzoic acid is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and basic. (ChemoSummarizer)|
HMDB0094691::Furanone a, also known as alpha-Crotonolactone or 2-Furanone, is classified as a member of the butenolides. Butenolides are dihydrofurans with a carbonyl group at the C2 carbon atom. Furanone a is considered to be a soluble (in water) and an extremely weak acidic compound. Furanone a can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094705::6-methyl-1-heptene is classified as a member of the unsaturated aliphatic hydrocarbons. Unsaturated aliphatic hydrocarbons are aliphatic Hydrocarbons that contains one or more unsaturated carbon atoms. These compounds contain one or more double or triple bonds. 6-methyl-1-heptene can be found in feces. ISOOCTENE is a clear colorless liquid with a petroleum-like odor. Less dense than water and insoluble in water. Vapors are lighter than air.|
HMDB0094707::2-propyl-1-pentanol is classified as a member of the primary alcohols. Primary alcohols are compounds comprising the primary alcohol functional group, with the general structure RCOH (R=alkyl, aryl). 2-propyl-1-pentanol is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and an extremely weak acidic compound. 2-propyl-1-pentanol can be found in feces.|
HMDB0033944::2-Phenylethanol, also known as phenethyl alcohol or benzeneethanol, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as benzene and substituted derivatives. These are aromatic compounds containing one monocyclic ring system consisting of benzene. 2-Phenylethanol exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and an extremely weak acidic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). 2-Phenylethanol has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, 2-phenylethanol is primarily located in the cytoplasm. 2-Phenylethanol exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. 2-Phenylethanol can be biosynthesized from phenylacetaldehyde; which is catalyzed by the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase. 2-Phenylethanol is a bitter, floral, and honey tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as loganberry, chinese mustard, poppy, and persian lime. This makes 2-phenylethanol a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. 2-Phenylethanol has been found to be associated with several diseases known as pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified and autism; 2-phenylethanol has also been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0030331::Xi-2-ethylheptanoic acid belongs to the class of organic compounds known as medium-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 4 and 12 carbon atoms. Xi-2-ethylheptanoic acid is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Xi-2-ethylheptanoic acid has been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, xi-2-ethylheptanoic acid is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP), cytoplasm and adiposome. Outside of the human body, xi-2-ethylheptanoic acid can be found in fruits. This makes xi-2-ethylheptanoic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product.|
HMDB0031230::Alpha-Ethyl caproic acid, also known as 2-ethylhexanoic acid or a-ethyl caproate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as medium-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 4 and 12 carbon atoms. Alpha-Ethyl caproic acid exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Alpha-Ethyl caproic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, sweat, and urine. Within the cell, Alpha-ethyl caproic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and adiposome. Alpha-Ethyl caproic acid exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Outside of the human body, Alpha-ethyl caproic acid can be found in fruits. This makes Alpha-ethyl caproic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product. Alpha-Ethyl caproic acid is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0032042::Butyl 3-methylbutanoate is found in alcoholic beverages. Butyl 3-methylbutanoate is used in fruit flavouring. Butyl 3-methylbutanoate is present in apricot, banana, strawberries, Parmesan and gruyere de comte cheeses, white wine, olives, plums, jack fruit, cherimoga and lamb's lettuc|
HMDB0031580::2-Methyl valeric acid, also known as 2-methylvalerate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as methyl-branched fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an acyl chain that has a methyl branch. Usually, they are saturated and contain only one or more methyl group. However, branches other than methyl may be present. 2-Methyl valeric acid is soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 2-Methyl valeric acid has been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, 2-methyl valeric acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and adiposome. 2-Methyl valeric acid is a cheese and sour tasting compound that can be found in pepper (spice). This makes 2-methyl valeric acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product.|
HMDB0033774::3-Methyl valeric acid, also known as 3-methylvalerate or 3-methyl-N-pentanoic acid, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as methyl-branched fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an acyl chain that has a methyl branch. Usually, they are saturated and contain only one or more methyl group. However, branches other than methyl may be present. 3-Methyl valeric acid is soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 3-Methyl valeric acid has been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, 3-methyl valeric acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and adiposome.|
HMDB0030058::, also known as ethyl propanoate or fema 2456, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbon atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or an aryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group). Thus, is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, is primarily located in the cytoplasm. exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. is a sweet, fruity, and grape tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as pineapple, apple, black elderberry, and olive. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. has been found to be associated with several diseases known as crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, irritable bowel syndrome, and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified; has also been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0002643::3-(3-Hydroxyphenyl)-3-hydroxypropanoic acid (HPHPA) is an organic acid detected in human urine. It is relatively abundant in adult human urine and it is normally relatively benign. It is thought that the presence of this acid is from nutritional sources (i.e. dietary phenylalanine or polyphenols). However, there has been a considerable degree of ambiguity in the origin and/or significance of this compound (PMID: 11978597  ). Recently, it has been reported that HPHPA is actually an abnormal phenylalanine metabolite arising from bacterial metabolism in the gastrointestinal tract. Specifically, HPHPA appears to arise from the action of the anaerobic bacteria Clostridia sp. (PMID: 20423563  ). Elevated levels of HPHPA have been reported in the urine of children with autism as well as in adult patients with schizophrenia. It has been proposed that HPHPA may be a bacterial metabolite of m-tyrosine, a tyrosine analog that causes symptoms of autism in experimental animals. Under certain conditions, HPHPA can act as a neurotoxin and a metabotoxin. A neurotoxin causes damage to nerve cells and nerve tissues. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of HPHPA are associated with autism and schizophrenia. The mechanism by which HPHPA exerts its toxic effects is not clear.  It may function as a catecholamine analog and disrupt catecholamine signalling, especially in younger individuals. Alternately, HPHPA may function as an amino acid analog to tyrosine and phenylalanine.  High plasma concentrations of phenylalanine (and possibly HPHPA) are known to influence the blood-brain barrier transport of large neutral amino acids. This altered transport is believed to interfere with the function of different cerebral enzyme systems in the developing brain.|
HMDB0012275::Phenethylamine (PEA) is an aromatic amine, which is a colorless liquid at room temperature. It is soluble in water, ethanol, and ether. Similar to other low-molecular-weight amines, it has a fishy odor. Upon exposure to air, it forms a solid carbonate salt with carbon dioxide. Phenethylamine is strongly basic and forms a stable crystalline hydrochloride salt with a melting point of 217 oC. Phenethylamine is also a skin irritant and possible sensitizer. Phenethylamine also has a constitutional isomer (+)-phenylethylamine (1-phenylethylamine), which has two stereoisomers: (R)-(+)-1-phenylethylamine and (S)-(-)-1-phenylethylamine. In the human brain, 2-phenethylamine is believed to function as a neuromodulator or neurotransmitter (a trace amine). Phenethylamine can be biosynthesized from the amino acid phenylalanine by enzymatic decarboxylation. It is also found in many foods such as chocolate, especially after microbial fermentation. However trace amounts from food are quickly metabolized by the enzyme MAO-B (into phenylacetic acid), preventing significant concentrations from reaching the brain. Phenylethylamine is a precursor to the neurotransmitter phenylethanolamine. High levels of PEA have been found in the urine of schizophrenics but it is not significantly elevated in the serum or CSF of schizophrenics (PMID: 7906896  , PMID: 7360842  ).  Urinary levels of PEA are significantly lower in children with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (PMID: 12205654  ).  It has been found that PEA is the primary compound found in carnivore (especially cat) urine that leads to rodent (mouse and rat) avoidance. In other words, phenylethylamine is useful for scaring off rodent pests.  Quantitative HPLC analysis across 38 mammalian species has shown that PEA production in urine is especially enhanced in carnivores, with some producing >3,000-fold more than herbivores (PMID: 21690383  ).|
HMDB0004667::13-hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid (13-HODE) is synthesized in the body from linoleic acid. 13-HODE prevents cell adhesion to endothelial cells and can inhibit cancer metastasis. 13-HODE synthesis is enhanced by cyclic AMP. Gamma-linolenic acid, a desaturated metabolite of linoleic acid, causes substantial stimulation of 13-HODE synthesis. A fall in gamma-linolenic acid synthesis with age may be related to the age-related fall in 13-HODE formation. (PMID 9561154  ) 13-HODE is considered an intermediate in Linoleic acid metabolism(KEGG ID C14762). It is generated from 13(S)-HPODE via the enzyme lipoxygenase [EC:1.13.11.12].|
HMDB0001539::Asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) is a naturally occurring chemical found in blood plasma. It is a metabolic by-product of continual protein modification processes in the cytoplasm of all human cells. It is closely related to L-arginine, a conditionally-essential amino acid. ADMA interferes with L-arginine in the production of nitric oxide, a key chemical to endothelial and hence cardiovascular health. Asymmetric dimethylarginine is created in protein methylation, a common mechanism of post-translational protein modification. This reaction is catalyzed by an enzyme set called S-adenosylmethionine protein N-methyltransferases (protein methylases I and II). The methyl groups transferred to create ADMA are derived from the methyl group donor S-adenosylmethionine, an intermediate in the metabolism of homocysteine. (Homocysteine is an important blood chemical, because it is also a marker of cardiovascular disease). After synthesis, ADMA migrates into the extracellular space and thence into blood plasma. Asymmetric dimethylarginine is measured using high performance liquid chromatography.|
HMDB0003334::Symmetric dimethylarginine (SDMA) is an endogenously produced inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase (EC-Number 1.14.13.39). However, elevated levels of SDMA occur in patients with vascular disease, especially suffering end-stage renal disease. (PMID 12401860  ).|
HMDB0000855::Nicotinamide riboside is involved in nicotinate and nicotinamide metabolism. Nicotinamide riboside was originally identified as a nutrient in milk. It is a useful compound for elevation of NAD+ levels in humans. Nicotinamide riboside has recently been discovered to be an NAD(+) precursor that is converted to nicotinamide mononucleotide by specific nicotinamide riboside kinases, Nrk1 and Nrk2. It has been shown that exogenous nicotinamide riboside promotes Sir2-dependent repression of recombination, improves gene silencing, and extends the lifespan of certain animal models without calorie restriction [PMID:17482543  ]. Supplementation in mammalian cells and mouse tissues increases NAD(+) levels and activates SIRT1 and SIRT3, culminating in enhanced oxidative metabolism and protection against high-fat diet-induced metabolic abnormalities. (PMID:22682224  ). Recent data suggest that nicotinamide riboside may be the only vitamin precursor that supports neuronal NAD+ synthesis (PMID: 18429699  ). Nicotinamide riboside kinase has an essential role for phosphorylation of nicotinamide riboside and the cancer drug tiazofurin (PMID 15137942  ).|
HMDB0003269::Nicotinuric acid is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction:. acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycine. Nicotinuric acid is the major detoxification product of nicotinic acid. It may serve as a simple quantitative index of hepatic biotransformation of nicotinic acid.(PMID: 3243933  ).|
HMDB0000408::2-Methyl-3-ketovaleric acid is a metabolite of beta-leucine in the beta-keto pathway of leucine metabolism. 2-Methyl-3-ketovaleric acid is a known pathological metabolite and associated with propionic acidemia, especially during periods of ketoacidosis; a severe deficiency of propionyl-CoA carboxylase in cultured fibroblasts has been detected in some neonatal cases. (PMID 7389125  , 6820422  , 7119896  , 7430116  , 3356699  ). 2-Methyl-3-ketovaleric acid induces a strong activity of inosine-5'-monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH; the rate-limiting enzyme in GTP synthesis), mimicking glucose. (PMID: 11145582  ).|
HMDB0000875::Trigonelline is an alkaloid with chemical formula C7H7NO2 and CAS number 535-83-1. Trigonelline is a product of the metabolism of niacin (vitamin B3) which is excreted in the urine. It is also found in coffee, where it may help to prevent dental caries by preventing the bacteria Streptococcus mutans from adhering to teeth. Trigonelline occurs in many other plants, including fenugreek seeds, garden peas, hemp seed, oats and potatoes. Trigonelline in the urine is a biomarker for the consumption of coffee, legumes and soy products.|
HMDB0000149::Ethanolamine is a viscous, hygroscopic amino alcohol with an ammoniacal odor. It is widely distributed in biological tissue and is a component of lecithin. It is used as a surfactant, fluorometric reagent, and to remove CO2 and H2S from natural gas and other gases. Ethanolamine is found to be associated with maple syrup urine disease and propionic acidemia, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000142::Formic acid is the simplest carboxylic acid. Formate is an intermediate in normal metabolism. It takes part in the metabolism of one-carbon compounds and its carbon may appear in methyl groups undergoing transmethylation. It is eventually oxidized to carbon dioxide. Formate is typically produced as a byproduct in the production of acetate. It is responsible for both metabolic acidosis and disrupting mitochondrial electron transport and energy production by inhibiting cytochrome oxidase activity, the terminal electron acceptor of the electron transport chain. Cell death from cytochrome oxidase inhibition by formate is believed to result partly from depletion of ATP, reducing energy concentrations so that essential cell functions cannot be maintained. Furthermore, inhibition of cytochrome oxidase by formate may also cause cell death by increased production of cytotoxic reactive oxygen species (ROS) secondary to the blockade of the electron transport chain. In nature, formic acid is found in the stings and bites of many insects of the order Hymenoptera, including bees and ants. The principal use of formic acid is as a preservative and antibacterial agent in livestock feed. When sprayed on fresh hay or other silage, it arrests certain decay processes and causes the feed to retain its nutritive value longer.|
HMDB0003406::D-serine is a stereo-isomer of the common amino acid, L-serine. D-serine was only thought to exist in bacteria until relatively recently. D-serine was the second D amino acid discovered to naturally exist in humans. The first one was D-aspartate. D-serine is synthesized from L-serine by serine racemase (SRR), and it is degraded by D-amino acid oxidase (DAO). It is found in high abundance in the brain. D-serine acts on the glycine binding site of the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) and modulates glutamate-mediated receptor activation. For the receptor to open, glutamate and either glycine or D-serine must bind to it. In fact, D-serine is a more potent agonist at the glycine site on the NMDAR than glycine itself. The importance of D-serine in mammalian brain function is apparent from extensive investigations reported and reviewed over the past decade, including roles in synaptic plasticity and memory. D-serine is also implicated in the pathophysiology and therapy of several psychiatric and neurological conditions including schizophrenia and glioma. In schizophrenia, there is evidence that D-serine levels are decreased, a deficiency that may contribute to the proposed NMDAR hypofunction of the disorder and that has led to D-serine replenishment as a novel therapeutic strategy.|
HMDB0000251::Taurine is a sulfur amino acid like methionine, cystine, cysteine and homocysteine. It is a lesser-known amino acid because it is not incorporated into the structural building blocks of protein. Yet taurine is an essential amino acid in pre-term and newborn infants of humans and many other species. Adults can synthesize their own taurine, yet are probably dependent in part on dietary taurine. Taurine is abundant in the brain, heart, breast, gallbladder and kidney and has important roles in health and disease in these organs. Taurine has many diverse biological functions serving as a neurotransmitter in the brain, a stabilizer of cell membranes and a facilitator in the transport of ions such as sodium, potassium, calcium and magnesium.| Taurine is highly concentrated in animal and fish protein, which are good sources of dietary taurine. It can be synthesized by the body from cysteine when vitamin B6 is present. Deficiency of taurine occurs in premature infants and neonates fed formula milk, and in various disease states. Inborn errors of taurine metabolism have been described. OMIM 168605  , an unusual neuropsychiatric disorder inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion through 3 generations of a family. Symptoms began late in the fifth decade in 6 affected persons and death occurred after 4 to 6 years. The earliest and most prominent symptom was mental depression not responsive to antidepressant drugs or electroconvulsive therapy. Sleep disturbances, exhaustion and marked weight loss were features. Parkinsonism developed later, and respiratory failure occurred terminally. OMIM 145350   describes congestive cardiomyopathy and markedly elevated urinary taurine levels (about 5 times normal). Other family members had late or holosystolic mitral valve prolapse and elevated urinary taurine values (about 2.5 times normal). In 2 with mitral valve prolapse, congestive cardiomyopathy eventually developed while the amounts of urinary taurine doubled.| Taurine, after GABA, is the second most important inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. Its inhibitory effect is one source of taurine's anticonvulsant and antianxiety properties. It also lowers glutamic acid in the brain, and preliminary clinical trials suggest taurine may be useful in some forms of epilepsy. Taurine in the brain is usually associated with zinc or manganese. The amino acids alanine and glutamic acid, as well as pantothenic acid, inhibit taurine metabolism while vitamins A and B6, zinc and manganese help build taurine. Cysteine and B6 are the nutrients most directly involved in taurine synthesis. Taurine levels have been found to decrease significantly in many depressed patients. One reason that the findings are not entirely clear is because taurine is often elevated in the blood of epileptics who need it. It is often difficult to distinguish compensatory changes in human biochemistry from true metabolic or deficiency disease. Low levels of taurine are found in retinitis pigmentosa. Taurine deficiency in experimental animals produces degeneration of light-sensitive cells. Therapeutic applications of taurine to eye disease are likely to be forthcoming. Taurine has many important metabolic roles. Supplements can stimulate prolactin and insulin release. The parathyroid gland makes a peptide hormone called glutataurine (glutamic acid-taurine), which further demonstrates taurine's role in endocrinology. Taurine increases bilirubin and cholesterol excretion in bile, critical to normal gallbladder function. It seems to inhibit the effect of morphine and potentiates the effects of opiate antagonists. Low plasma taurine levels have been found in a variety of conditions, i.e., depression, hypertension, hypothyroidism, gout, institutionalized patients, infertility, obesity, kidney failure and others (http://www.dcnutrition.com/AminoAcids/). Moreover, taurine is found to be associated with maple syrup urine disease, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000640::Levoglucosan is an anhydrohexose that is the 1,6-anhydro-derivative of beta-D-glucopyranose. It is formed from the pyrolysis of carbohydrates, such as starch and cellulose. As a result, levoglucosan is often used as a chemical tracer for biomass burning in atmospheric chemistry studies, particularly with respect to airborne particulate matter. Levoglucosan in urine has been shown to be highly correlated with regional fires and as a biomarker for wood smoke exposure (PMID: 19165390  ). This is because the gas emitted by the pyrolysis of wood (biomass) contains significant amounts of levoglucosan. The hydrolysis of levoglucosan generates the fermentable sugar glucose, and therefore lignocellulosic material exhibits great potential as a renewable feedstock for the production of bioethanol. Levoglucosan can also be utilized in the synthesis of chiral polymers such as unhydrolysable glucose polymers. Levoglucosan is also produced via caramelization of sugar. Consumption of caramel or caramel-containing sweets can lead to a short-term 5X increase in urinary levels of levoglucosan (from 20 uM/mM creatinine to 100 uM/mM creatinine) (PMID: 19707249  ). Urinary levoglucosan levels increase within 2 h of caramel consumption and return to pre-exposure levels within 24 h. These data suggest that diet is a major factor in determining urinary levoglucosan levels and that recent dietary history needs to be taken into account to use levoglucosan as a marker for wood smoke exposure. Excretory levels of levoglucosan vary widely from zero up to 5.3 mmol/L (PMID: 3757263  , 16448658  , 16317539  ).|
HMDB0000339::2-Methylbutyrylglycine is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism, such as propionic acidemia. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction: acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycine. The isolated excretion of high levels of 2-methylbutyrylglycine (2-MBG) is the hallmark of short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency or SBCADD (PMID:15615815  ). The disorder is also called 2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (PMID: 17883863  ) and has been associated with autism and mental retardation. SBCADD is a recently described autosomal recessive disorder caused by a defect in the degradation pathway of L- isoleucine leading to increased urinary excretion of 2-methylbutyryl glycine. The enzymatic defect results from disruption of the SBCAD gene. Deficiency of SBCAD leads to accumulation of its substrate, 2-methylbutyryl-CoA within the mitochondrion. This substance is transesterified with glycine by the mitochondrial enzyme acyl-CoA glycine-N-acyltransferase (glycine-N-acylase) to form 2-methylbutyryl glycine. Affected patients can be divided into two categories. The first category consists of infants detected by newborn screening programmes. These infants are treated with diet and remain without clinical symptoms. In the second category affected patients are diagnosed because they presented clinically with seizures and psychomotor delay and have increased urinary excretion of 2-methylbutyryl glycine (PMID: 17883863  ). 2-methylbutyrylglycine has also been found in the urine of patients with propionyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency after consuming isoleucine. (PMID: 630060  ). 2-methylbutyrylglycine is also elevated in the urine of patients with glutaric aciduria II and ethylmalonic encephalopathy.|
HMDB0000378::2-Methylbutyroylcarnitine is a member of the class of compounds known as acylcarnitines. Acylcarnitines are organic compounds containing a fatty acid with the carboxylic acid attached to carnitine through an ester bond. Thus, 2-Methylbutyroylcarnitine is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. 2-Methylbutyroylcarnitine is practically insoluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 2-Methylbutyroylcarnitine can be found in urine. Within the cell, 2-Methylbutyroylcarnitine is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). It can also be found in the extracellular space. Usually not detected in normal individuals, the elevation of 2-methylbutyrylcarnitine suggests a deficiency of a dehydrogenase specific for isobutyryl-CoA, important in the differential diagnosis of branched chain organic acidurias by analysis of urinary organic acids and acylcarnitines in plasma or dried blood spots (The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, Chapter 93).|
HMDB0006961::Hydroxyacetone, also known as acetol or acetone alcohol, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as alpha-hydroxy ketones. These are organic compounds containing a carboxylic acid, and an amine group attached to the alpha carbon atom, relative to the C=O group. Hydroxyacetone exists as a liquid, soluble (in water), and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Hydroxyacetone has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Hydroxyacetone participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, hydroxyacetone can be biosynthesized from acetone. Hydroxyacetone can also be converted into hydroxyacetone phosphate. Outside of the human body, hydroxyacetone can be found in a number of food items such as apple, strawberry, vaccinium (blueberry, cranberry, huckleberry), and kohlrabi. This makes hydroxyacetone a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0000957::Pyrocatechol, often known as catechol or benzene-1,2-diol, is a benzenediol, with formula C6H4(OH)2. It was first prepared in 1839 by H. Reinsch by distilling catechin (the juice of Mimosa catechu). This colourless compound occurs naturally, but about 20000 tons are manufactured each year, mainly as precursors to pesticides, flavors, and fragrances. Its sulfonic acid is often present in the urine of many mammals. Small amounts of catechol occur naturally in fruits and vegetables, along with the enzyme polyphenol oxidase. Upon mixing the enzyme with the substrate and exposure to oxygen (as when a potato or apple is cut), the colorless catechol oxidizes to reddish-brown benzoquinone derivatives. The enzyme is inactivated by adding an acid, such as lemon juice, or by refrigeration. Excluding oxygen also prevents the browning reaction. Catechol melts at 28 oC and boils at 250 oC. It is employed in medicine as an expectorant. The dimethyl ether or veratrol is also used in medicine. Many other pyrocatechin derivatives have been suggested for therapeutic application.|
HMDB0001895::Salicylic acid is a colorless, crystalline organic carboxylic acid. Salicylic acid is toxic if ingested in large quantities, but in small quantities is used as a food preservative and antiseptic in toothpaste. It is also the key additive in many skin-care products for the treatment of acne, psoriasis, callouses, corns, keratosis pilaris and warts. The carboxyl group (COOH) can react with alcohols, forming several useful esters. The name derives from the latin word for the willow tree (Salix), from whose bark it can be obtained. --Wikipedia.|
HMDB0000258::Sucrose is a nonreducing disaccharide composed of glucose and fructose linked via their anomeric carbons. It is obtained commercially from sugarcane, sugar beet (beta vulgaris), and other plants and used extensively as a food and a sweetener. Sucrose is derived by crushing and extraction of sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum) with water or extraction of the sugar beet (Beta vulgaris) with water, evaporating, and purifying with lime, carbon, and various liquids. Sucrose is also obtainable from sorghum. Sucrose occurs in low percentages in honey and maple syrup. Sucrose is used as a sweetener in foods and soft drinks, in the manufacture of syrups, in invert sugar, confectionery, preserves and jams, demulcent, pharmaceutical products, and caramel. Sucrose is also a chemical intermediate for detergents, emulsifying agents, and other sucrose derivatives. Sucrose is wiidespread in seeds, leaves, fruits, flowers and roots of plants, where it functions as an energy store for metabolism and as a carbon source for biosynthesis. The annual world production of sucrose is in excess of 90 million tons mainly from the juice of sugar cane (20%) and sugar beet (17%). In addition to its use as a sweetner, sucrose is used in food products as a preservative, antioxidant, moisture control agent, stabilizer and thickening agent.|
HMDB0002658::6-hydroxynicotinic acid (6-OHNA) is exploited in the use of NMR spectroscopy or gas chromatography--mass spectrometry for the diagnosis of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in urinary tract infection. Among the common bacteria causing urinary infection, only P. aeruginosa produces 6-hydroxynicotinic acid from nicotinic acid. Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection has been reported to be the third leading cause of urinary infection, accounting for 11% of such infections, the first and second being Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumonia, respectively. Analyses of the NMR spectra of the bacterial media with variable cell count of P. aeruginosa, shows that the intensity of the signals of the 6-hydroxynicotinic acid increases with increasing number of bacterial cells. (PMID: 3926801  , 15759292  ).|
HMDB0000087::Dimethylamine (DMA) is an organic secondary amine. It is a colorless, liquefied and flammable gas with an ammonia and fish-like odor. Dimethylamine is abundantly present in human urine. Main sources of urinary DMA have been reported to include trimethylamine N-oxide, a common food component, and asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA), an endogenous inhibitor of nitric oxide (NO) synthesis. ADMA is excreted in the urine in part unmetabolized and in part after hydrolysis to DMA by dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase (DDAH). Statistically significant increases in urinary DMA have been found in individuals after the consumption of fish and seafoods. The highest values were obtained for individuals that consumed coley, squid and whiting with cod, haddock, sardine, skate and swordfish (PMID: 18282650  ). As a pure chemical substance Dimethylamine is used as dehairing agent in tanning, in dyes, in rubber accelerators, in soaps and cleaning compounds and as an agricultural fungicide. In the body, DMA also undergoes nitrosation under weak acid conditions to give dimethlynitrosamine.|
HMDB0001882::Dihydroxyacetone (also known as DHA) is a ketotriose compound. Its addition to blood preservation solutions results in better maintenance of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate levels during storage. It is readily phosphorylated to dihydroxyacetone phosphate by triokinase in erythrocytes. In combination with naphthoquinones, it acts as a sunscreening agent. Dihydroxyacetone is the simplest of all ketoses and, having no chiral centre, is the only one that has no optical activity. Dihydroxyacetone is a simple non-toxic sugar. It is often derived from plant sources such as sugar beets and sugar cane, by the fermentation of glycerin. Dihydroxyacetone is a white crystalline powder which is water soluble (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0000699::1-Methylnicotinamide is a metabolite of nicotinamide and is produced primarily in the liver. It has anti-inflammatory properties (PMID 16197374  ). It is a product of nicotinamide N-methyltransferase [EC 2.1.1.1] in the pathway of nicotinate and nicotinamide metabolism (KEGG). 1-Methylnicotinamide may be an endogenous activator of prostacyclin production and thus may regulate thrombotic as well as inflammatory processes in the cardiovascular system (PMID: 17641676  ).|
HMDB0006029::N-Acetylglutamine (GIcNAc) is a modified amino acid (an acetylated analogue of glutamine), a metabolite present in normal human urine. The decomposition products of GIcNAc have been identified by NMR and HPLC-MS as N-acetyl-L-glutamic acid, N-(2,6-dioxo-3-piperidinyl) acetamide, pyroglutamic acid, glutamic acid, and glutamine. GIcNAc is used for parenteral nutrition as a source of glutamine, since glutamine is too unstable, but GIcNAc is very stable. In patients treated with aminoglycosides and/or glycopeptides, elevation GIcNAc in urine suggests renal tubular injury. High amounts of N-acetylated amino acids (i.e.: N-Acetylglutamine) were detected patient with aminoacylase I deficiency (EC 3.5.1.14, a homodimeric zinc-binding metalloenzyme located in the cytosol), a novel inborn error of metabolism. (PMID: 15331932  , 11312773  , 7952062  , 2569664  , 16274666  ).|
HMDB0003411::D-proline is an isomer of the naturally occurring amino acid, L-Proline. D-amino acids have been found in relatively high abundance in human plasma and saliva (PMID: 16480744  ). These amino acids may be of bacterial origin, but there is also evidence that they are endogenously produced through amino acid racemase activity (PMID: 1426150  ).|
HMDB0000294::Urea is a highly soluble organic compound formed in the liver from ammonia produced by the deamination of amino acids. It is the principal end product of protein catabolism and constitutes about one half of the total urinary solids. Urea is formed in a cyclic pathway known simply as the urea cycle. In this cycle, amino groups donated by ammonia and L-aspartate are converted to urea. Urea is essentially a waste product; it has no physiological function. It is dissolved in blood (in humans in a concentration of 2.5 - 7.5 mmol/liter) and excreted by the kidney in the urine. In addition, a small amount of urea is excreted (along with sodium chloride and water) in human sweat. Urea is found to be associated with primary hypomagnesemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0001967::Carbon dioxide is a colorless, odorless gas that can be formed by the body and is necessary for the respiration cycle of plants and animals. Carbon dioxide is produced during respiration by all animals, fungi and microorganisms that depend on living and decaying plants for food, either directly or indirectly. It is, therefore, a major component of the carbon cycle. Additionally, carbon dioxide is used by plants during photosynthesis to make sugars which may either be consumed again in respiration or used as the raw material to produce polysaccharides such as starch and cellulose, proteins and the wide variety of other organic compounds required for plant growth and development. When inhaled at concentrations much higher than usual atmospheric levels, it can produce a sour taste in the mouth and a stinging sensation in the nose and throat. These effects result from the gas dissolving in the mucous membranes and saliva, forming a weak solution of carbonic acid. Carbon dioxide is used by the food industry, the oil industry, and the chemical industry. Carbon dioxide is used to produce carbonated soft drinks and soda water. Traditionally, the carbonation in beer and sparkling wine comes about through natural fermentation, but some manufacturers carbonate these drinks artificially.|
HMDB0001429::Phosphate is a salt of phosphoric acid. In organic chemistry, a phosphate, or organophosphate, is an ester of phosphoric acid. Organic phosphates are important in biochemistry, biogeochemistry and ecology. Phosphate (Pi) is an essential component of life.| In biological systems, phosphorus is found as a free phosphate ion in solution and is called inorganic phosphate, to distinguish it from phosphates bound in various phosphate esters. Inorganic phosphate is generally denoted Pi and at physiological (neutral) pH primarily consists of a mixture of HPO2-4 and H2PO-4 ions. phosphates are most commonly found in the form of adenosine phosphates, (AMP, ADP and ATP) and in DNA and RNA and can be released by the hydrolysis of ATP or ADP. Similar reactions exist for the other nucleoside diphosphates and triphosphates. Phosphoanhydride bonds in ADP and ATP, or other nucleoside diphosphates and triphosphates, contain high amounts of energy which give them their vital role in all living organisms. Phosphate must be actively transported into cells against its electrochemical gradient. In vertebrates, two unrelated families of Na+-dependent Pi transporters carry out this task. Remarkably, the two families transport different Pi species: whereas type II Na+/Pi cotransporters (SCL34) prefer divalent HPO4(2), type III Na+/Pi cotransporters (SLC20) transport monovalent H2PO4. The SCL34 family comprises both electrogenic and electroneutral members that are expressed in various epithelia and other polarized cells. Through regulated activity in apical membranes of the gut and kidney, they maintain body Pi homeostasis, and in salivary and mammary glands, liver, and testes they play a role in modulating the Pi content of luminal fluids. Phosphate levels in the blood play an important role in hormone signaling and in bone homeostasis.| In classical endocrine regulation, low serum phosphate induces the renal production of the seco-steroid hormone 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH)2D3). This active metabolite of vitamin D acts to restore circulating mineral (i.e. phosphate and calcium) levels by increasing absorption in the intestine, reabsorption in the kidney, and mobilization of calcium and phosphate from bone. Thus, chronic renal failure is associated with hyperparathyroidism, which in turn contributes to osteomalacia (softening of the bones). Another complication of chronic renal failure is hyperphosphatemia (low levels of phosphate in the blood). Hyperphosphatemia (excess levels of phosphate in the blood) is a prevalent condition in kidney dialysis patients and is associated with increased risk of mortality. Hypophosphatemia (hungry bone syndrome) has been associated to postoperative electrolyte aberrations and after parathyroidectomy (PMID: 17581921  , 11169009  , 11039261  , 9159312  , 17625581  ). Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23) has recently been recognized as a key mediator of phosphate homeostasis, its most notable effect being promotion of phosphate excretion. FGF-23 was discovered to be involved in diseases such as autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets, X-linked hypophosphatemia, and tumor-induced osteomalacia in which phosphate wasting was coupled to inappropriately low levels of 1,25(OH)2D3. FGF-23 is regulated by dietary phosphate in humans. In particular it was found that phosphate restriction decreased FGF-23, and phosphate loading increased FGF-23.|
HMDB0000495::Androstanediol is a metabolite of dihydrotestosterone, itself a metabolite of testosterone. Androstanediol is implicated in the regulation of gonadotropin secretion. As a metabolite of dihydroxytestosterone formed in the peripheral tissues, androstanediol and androstnediol-glucuronide can be used to estimate peripheral androgen activity. Androstanediol is a potential GABA (A) receptor-modulating neurosteroid with anticonvulsant properties and hence could act as a key neuromodulator in the central nervous system. It is considered that androstanediol has hedonic effects; therefore it is anticipated that androgens that are readily metabolized to androstanediol may have higher abuse potential than androgens that are not as easily metabolized to androstanediol. These results add to the growing literature indicating that athletes and non-athletes may be at considerable risk when they abuse androgens. (PMID: 11500254  , 16040068  , 11744084  ).|
HMDB0003771::2-Methylacetoacetic acid is a metabolite that has an increased excretion in patients with acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (EC 2.3.1.9) deficiency (OMIM 607809  , ACAT1; OMIM 100678  , ACAT2; OMIM 604770  , ACAA2; OMIM 607809  ). Thiolases are ubiquitous and important enzymes. Several isoenzymes are known, which can occur in the cytosol (ACAT2), the mitochondria (ACAT1) , or the peroxisomes (ACAA2). Thiolases are CoA-dependent enzymes which catalyze the formation of a carbon-carbon bond in a Claisen condensation step and its reverse reaction via a thiolytic degradation mechanism. mitochondrial acetoacetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) thiolase (T2) is important in the pathways for the synthesis and degradation of ketone bodies as well as for the degradation of 2-methylacetoacetyl-CoA (PMID: 17371050  , 14518824  , 9744475  , 9001814  ). Moreover, 2-methylacetoacetic acid is found to be associated with beta-ketothiolase deficiency, which is also an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0006535::Beta-1,4-Mannose-N-acetylglucosamine, also known as not available, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as acylaminosugars. These are organic compounds containing a sugar linked to a chain through N-acyl group. Beta-1,4-Mannose-N-acetylglucosamine is soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Within the cell, Beta-1,4-mannose-N-acetylglucosamine is primarily located in the cytoplasm and lysosome.|
HMDB0000257::Thiosulfate occurs naturally in hot springs and geysers, and is produced by certain biochemical processes. In the body, thiosulfate converts small amounts of cyanide ion into harmless products and plays a role in the biosynthesis of cysteine, a sulfur-containing amino acid that locks proteins into their correct three-dimensional shapes. Thiosulfate is not found in large quantities in nature. Solutions of thiosulfate break down into sulfur, sulfites, and sulfates when exposed to acids, light, metal ions, and bacteria.| Thiosulfate is sometimes used as an antidote for cyanide poisoning. It reacts with cyanide to produce sulfite and thiocyanate ions: CN- + S2O32- SCN- + SO32- This reaction is catalyzed by an enzyme produced by cell mitochondria to neutralize small quantities of ingested cyanide (which occurs naturally in cassava root, lima beans, and almonds!). Thiosulfate is an intermediate in several biochemical pathways, including the synthesis of L-cysteine. Thiosulfate is manufactured by some cells by oxidation of elemental sulfur and by degradation of L-cysteine. Use: Photography (fixing agent to dissolve unchanged silver salts from exposed negatives), chrome tanning, removing chlorine in bleaching and papermaking, extraction of silver from its ores, dechlorination of water, mordant, reagent, bleaching, reducing agent in chrome dyeing, sequestrant in salt (up to 0.1%), antidote for cyanide poisoning. (Hawley's Condensed Chemical Dictionary) Source/Synthesis: Synthesis by dehydration of the pentahydrate at 105 degree. Alternatively formed by reaction of S2Cl2 with Na2O2 or by reduction of Na2S2O4 with sodium amalgam Use/Importance: Commercially available Biological Use/Importance: Cyanide antidote often administered with other antidotes, antifungal agent (ChemNetBase) Sodium thiosulfate is a common analytical reagent used in iodometric titration to analyze chlorine, bromine, and sulfide. Other uses are in bleaching paper pulp, bleaching straw, ivory, and bones, for removing chlorine from solutions, silver extraction from its ores, a mordant in dyeing and printing textiles, and as an antidote to cyanide poisoning. Another major application is in photography, where it is used as a fixer to dissolve unchanged silver salts from exposed negatives. (Handbook of Inorganic Chemicals).|
HMDB0001368::3-Mercaptopyruvic acid is an intermediate in the metabolism of Cysteine. It is a substrate for L-lactate dehydrogenase A chain, 3-mercaptopyruvate sulfurtransferase, Aspartate aminotransferase (mitochondrial), L-lactate dehydrogenase C chain, L-lactate dehydrogenase A-like 6A, Aspartate aminotransferase (cytoplasmic), L-lactate dehydrogenase B chain and L-lactate dehydrogenase A-like 6B.|
HMDB0001453::Thiocyanate is analogous to the cyanate ion, [OCN]-, wherein oxygen is replaced by sulfur. [SCN]- is one of the pseudohalogens, due to the similarity of its reactions to that of halide ions. Thiocyanate was formerly known as rhodanide (from a Greek word for rose) because of the red color of its complexes with iron. Thiocyanates are typically colorless. Cyanide ions can react with cystine to yield thicocyanate. This reaction occurs to a slight extent even in neutral solution, but is more pronounced in alkaline solutions of cystine. In addition to this non-enzymatic route, cyanide produced in vivo can be converted in part to thiocyanate by sulfur transferase systems. The thiocyanate ion can be oxidized at acid pH by hydrogen peroxide to generate sulfate and cyanide. The reaction is catalyzed by hemoglobin acting as a peroxidase.| Thiocyanate is analogous to the cyanate ion, [OCN]-, wherein oxygen is replaced by sulfur. [SCN]- is one of the pseudohalogens, due to the similarity of its reactions to that of halide ions. Thiocyanate was formerly known as rhodanide (from a Greek word for rose) because of the red color of its complexes with iron. Thiocyanates are typically colorless. Cyanide ions can react with cystine to yield thicocyanate. This reaction occurs to a slight extent even in neutral solution, but is more pronounced in alkaline solutions of cystine. In addition to this non-enzymatic route, cyanide produced in vivo can be converted in part to thiocyanate by sulfur transferase systems. The thiocyanate ion can be oxidized at acid pH by hydrogen peroxide to generate sulfate and cyanide. The reaction is catalyzed by hemoglobin acting as a peroxidase. A study shows that thiocyanate has a protective effect in lung in cystic fibrosis, and an anti-inflammatory effect in arterial endothelial cells, a neuronal cell line, and a pancreatic beta cell line (PMID: 19918082  ).|
HMDB0002127::3-Mercaptolactic acid, also known as 3-mercaptolactate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as monosaccharides. Monosaccharides are compounds containing one carbohydrate unit not glycosidically linked to another such unit, and no set of two or more glycosidically linked carbohydrate units. Monosaccharides have the general formula CnH2nOn. 3-Mercaptolactic acid is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Within the cell, 3-mercaptolactic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm. 3-Mercaptolactic acid can be converted into 3-mercaptopyruvic acid through the action of the enzyme L-lactate dehydrogenase. In humans, 3-mercaptolactic acid is involved in the cysteine metabolism pathway and the cystinosis, ocular nonnephropathic pathway. 3-Mercaptolactic acid is also involved in the metabolic disorder called the Beta-mercaptolactate-cysteine disulfiduria pathway.|
HMDB0001060::Ubiquinol 8 is a ubiquinol in which the polyprenyl substituent is octaprenyl. Ubiquinol-8 is the reduced form of ubiquinone-8. Ubiquinone (also known as coenzyme Q) is an isoprenoid quinone that functions as an electron carrier in membranes. In eukaryotes, ubiquinone is found mostly within the inner mitochondrial membrane where it functions in respiratory electron transport, transferring two electrons from either complex I (NADH dehydrogenase) or complex II (succinate-ubiquinone reductase) to complex III (bc1 complex). The quinone nucleus of ubiquinone is derived directly from 4-hydroxybenzoate, while the isoprenoid subunits of the polyisoprenoid tail are synthesized via the methylerythritol phosphate pathway, which feeds isoprene units into the polyprenyl biosynthesis pathways. The number of isoprenoid subunits in the ubiquinone side chain varies in different species. For example, Saccharomyces cerevisiae has 6 such subunits, Escherichia coli K-12 has 8, rat and mouse have 9, and Homo sapiens has 10. Ubiquinol-8 is effective as an anti-oxidant. By donating one of its hydrogen atoms to become the free-radical semiquinone (.Q-), it can neutralize a lipid peroxyl radical. The free-radical semiquinone is then restored to a non-free-radical state by the respiratory chain Q cycle. Ubiquinol or the free-radical semiquinone can also regenerate the Vitamin E tocopheroxyl radical by electron donation (http://www.benbest.com/nutrceut/CoEnzymeQ.html).|
HMDB0010316::Acetaminophen glucuronide is a natural human metabolite of Acetaminophen generated in the liver by UDP glucuonyltransferase. Glucuronidation is used to assist in the excretion of toxic substances, drugs or other substances that cannot be used as an energy source. Glucuronic acid is attached via a glycosidic bond to the substance, and the resulting glucuronide, which has a much higher water solubility than the original substance, is eventually excreted by the kidneys. Acetaminophen glucuronide is found to be associated with beta-thalassemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000079::Dihydrothymine is an intermediate breakdown product of thymine. Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase catalyzes the reduction of thymine into 5,6-dihydrothymine then dihydropyrimidinase hydrolyzes 5,6-dihydrothymine into N-carbamyl-beta-alanine. Finally, beta-ureidopropionase catalyzes the conversion of N-carbamyl-beta-alanine to beta-alanine. When present at abnormally high levels, dihydrothymine can be toxic, although the mechanism of toxicity is not clear. In particular, patients with dihydropyrimidinase deficiency exhibit highly increased concentrations of 5,6-dihydrouracil and 5,6-dihydrothymine, and moderately increased concentrations of uracil and thymine can be detected in urine. Dihydropyrimidinase deficiency is a disorder that can cause neurological and gastrointestinal problems in some affected individuals. The most common neurological abnormalities that occur are intellectual disability, seizures, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), abnormally small head size (microcephaly), and autistic behaviours that affect communication and social interaction. Gastrointestinal problems that occur in dihydropyrimidinase deficiency include backflow of acidic stomach contents into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux) and recurrent episodes of vomiting.|
HMDB0000262::One of the pyrimidine bases of living matter. Derivation: Hydrolysis of deoxyribonucleic acid, from methylcyanoacetylurea by catalytic reduction. Use: Biochemical research. (Hawley's Condensed Chemical Dictionary). Thymine is a pyrimidine nucleobase. As the name implies, thymine may be derived by methylation of uracil at the 5th carbon. Thymine is found in the nucleic acid DNA. In RNA thymine is replaced with uracil in most cases. In DNA, thymine binds to adenine via two hydrogen bonds to assist in stabilizing the nucleic acid structures.|
HMDB0002031::Beta-ureidoisobutyrate (betaUIB) is increased in the urine of patients with beta-ureidopropionase (EC 3.5.1.6) deficiency (PMID: 12271438  ), a gentic disorder. Ureidoisobutyric acid can be used to predict patient's individual phenotypes of enzyme deficiencies in pyrimidine metabolism when associated with a risk for severe toxicity against the antineoplastic agent 5-fluorouracil (PMID: 12798197  ).|
HMDB0000308::3b-Hydroxy-5-cholenoic acid is a monohydroxy bile acid of endogenous origin. It is found in biologic fluids beginning in fetal life. (PMID 5567561  ; 4803245; 93138) Large amounts of 3 beta-hydroxy-5-cholenoic acid could be found in children with the syndrome of hepatic ductular hypoplasia (PMID 3987031  ).|
HMDB0002061::Hyaluronic acid (HA) is the most abundant glycosaminoglycan (GAG) in mammalian tissue. It is present in high concentrations in connective tissue, such as skin, vitreous humour, cartilage, and umbilical cord, but the largest single reservoir is the synovial fluid (SF) of the diarthrodial joints, where concentrations of 0.5-4 mg/mL are achieved. Hyaluronic acid is the major hydrodynamic nonprotein component of joint SF. Its unique viscoelastic properties confer remarkable shock absorbing and lubricating abilities to SF, while its enormous macromolecular size and hydrophilicity serve to retain fluid in the joint cavity during articulation. HA restricts the entry of large plasma proteins and cells into SF but facilitates solute exchange between the synovial capillaries and cartilage and other joint tissues. In addition, HA can form a pericellular coat around cells, interact with proinflammatory mediators, and bind to cell receptors, such as cluster determinant (CD)44 and receptor for hyaluronate-mediated motility (RHAMM), where it modulates cell proliferation, migration, and gene expression. All these physicochemical and biologic properties of HA have been shown to be molecular weight (MW) dependent. The diverse physicochemical properties of HA arise from its unique macromolecular structure. The HA is an exceptionally long (3-30 μm) and unbranched nonsulfated GAG composed of repeating disaccharide units of N-acetylglucosamine and glucuronic acid glycosidically linked through their respective 1-4 ring positions. Hydroxyl group oxygens at the glucuronyl-1 and glucosamine 3-positions are used for further polymerization of the HA disaccharide units to form chains that, when released from the cell plasma membrane, are of variable length and thus polydispersity. Despite the simplicity of the HA primary structure, this linear polyelectrolyte adopts complex conformations in solution, which engender it with diverse biologic properties. Within the joint cavity, HA molecules are predominately synthesized by the type B synovial cells (PMID: 12219318  ).|
HMDB0000761::Lithocholic acid, also known as 3α-hydroxy-5β-cholan-24-oic acid or LCA, is a secondary bile acid. It is formed from chenodeoxycholate by bacterial action, and is usually conjugated with glycine or taurine. It acts as a detergent to solubilize fats for absorption and is itself absorbed. It is used as cholagogue and choleretic. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in the bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, and depends only on the presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine, and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH, and consequently require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues.| The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g. membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ). When present in sufficiently high levels, lithocholic acid can act as an oncometabolite. An oncometabolite is a compound that when present at chronically high levels promotes tumour growth and survival. Chronically high levels of lithocholic acid are associated with several forms of cancer including colon cancer, pancreatic cancer, esophageal cancer, and many other GI cancers. High bile acid levels lead to the generation of reactive oxygen species and reactive nitrogen species, disruption of the cell membrane and mitochondria, induction of DNA damage, mutation and apoptosis, and the development of reduced apoptosis capability upon chronic exposure (PMID: 24884764  ). Dietary fibre can bind to lithocholic acid and aid in its excretion in stool. As such, fibre can protect against colon cancer.|
HMDB0000518::Chenodeoxycholic acid is a bile acid. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ). Usually conjugated with either glycine or taurine. It acts as a detergent to solubilize fats for intestinal absorption and is reabsorbed by the small intestine. It is used as cholagogue, a choleretic laxative, and to prevent or dissolve gallstones.|
HMDB0000619::Cholic acid is a major primary bile acid produced in the liver and is usually conjugated with glycine or taurine. It facilitates fat absorption and cholesterol excretion. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in the bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, and depends only on the presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine, and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH, and consequently require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients.| Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g. membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ). When present in sufficiently high levels, cholic acid can act as a hepatotoxin and a metabotoxin. A hepatotoxin causes damage to the liver or liver cells. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Among the primary bile acids, cholic acid is considered to be the least hepatotoxic while deoxycholic acid is the most hepatoxic (PMID: 1641875  ). The liver toxicity of bile acids appears to be due to their ability to peroxidate lipids and to lyse liver cells. Chronically high levels of cholic acid are associated with familial hypercholanemia. In hypercholanemia, bile acids, including cholic acid, are elevated in the blood. This disease causes liver damage, extensive itching, poor fat absorption, and can lead to rickets due to lack of calcium in bones. The deficiency of normal bile acids in the intestines results in a deficiency of vitamin K, which also adversely affects clotting of the blood. The bile acid ursodiol (ursodeoxycholic acid) can improve symptoms associated with familial hypercholanemia.|
HMDB0000637::Chenodeoxycholic acid glycine conjugate is an acyl glycine and a bile acid-glycine conugate. It is a secondary bile acid produced by the action of enzymes existing in the microbial flora of the colonic environment. In hepatocytes, both primary and secondary bile acids undergo amino acid conjugation at the C-24 carboxylic acid on the side chain, and almost all bile acids in the bile duct therefore exist in a glycine conjugated form (PMID:16949895  ). This compound usually exists as the sodium salt and acts as a detergent to solubilize fats for absorption and is itself absorbed. It is a cholagogue and choleretic.|
HMDB0000115::Glycolic acid (or hydroxyacetic acid) is the smallest alpha-hydroxy acid (AHA). This colourless, odourless, and hygroscopic crystalline solid is highly soluble in water. Due to its excellent capability to penetrate skin, glycolic acid is often used in skin care products, most often as a chemical peel. It may reduce wrinkles, acne scarring, and hyperpigmentation and improve many other skin conditions, including actinic keratosis, hyperkeratosis, and seborrheic keratosis. Once applied, glycolic acid reacts with the upper layer of the epidermis, weakening the binding properties of the lipids that hold the dead skin cells together. This allows the outer skin to dissolve, revealing the underlying skin. It is thought that this is due to the reduction of calcium ion concentrations in the epidermis and the removal of calcium ions from cell adhesions, leading to desquamation. Glycolic acid is a known inhibitor of tyrosinase. This can suppress melanin formation and lead to a lightening of skin colour. Acute doses of glycolic acid on skin or eyes leads to local effects that are typical of a strong acid (e.g. dermal and eye irritation). Glycolate is a nephrotoxin if consumed orally. A nephrotoxin is a compound that causes damage to the kidney and kidney tissues. Glycolic acid's renal toxicity is due to its metabolism to oxalic acid. Glycolic and oxalic acid, along with excess lactic acid, are responsible for the anion gap metabolic acidosis. Oxalic acid readily precipitates with calcium to form insoluble calcium oxalate crystals. Renal tissue injury is caused by widespread deposition of oxalate crystals and the toxic effects of glycolic acid. Glycolic acid does exhibit some inhalation toxicity and can cause respiratory, thymus, and liver damage if present in very high levels over long periods of time.|
HMDB0000036::Taurocholic acid is a bile acid and is the product of the conjugation of cholic acid with taurine. Its sodium salt is the chief ingredient of the bile of carnivorous animals. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in the bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depending only on the presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine, and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH, and consequently require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues.| The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g. membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ). Taurocholic acid, as with all bile acids, acts as a detergent to solubilize fats for absorption and is itself absorbed. It is used as a cholagogue and choleretic (a bile purging agent). Hydrolysis of taurocholic acid yields taurine, a nonessential amino acid. Taurocholic acid is one of the main components of urinary nonsulfated bile acids in biliary atresia. Raised levels of taurocholate in fetal serum in obstetric cholestasis may result in the development of a fetal dysrhythmia and sudden intra-uterine death (PMID: 3944741  , 11256973  ).|
HMDB0000951::Taurochenodesoxycholic acid is a bile acid formed in the liver by conjugation of chenodeoxycholate with taurine, usually as the sodium salt. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ).|
HMDB0000381::Allolithocholic acid is a bile acid present in normal serum and feces, with a tendency to be at higher concentrations in patients with colon cancer, particularly in men (PMID 16548228  ). A bile acid. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ).|
HMDB0000700::3-Hydroxypropionic acid is a carboxylic acid. It is an intermediate in the breakdown of branched-chain amino acids and propionic acid from the gut. Typically it originates from propionyl-CoA and a defect in the enzyme propionyl carboxylase. This leads to a buildup in propionyl-CoA in the mitochondria.  Such a buildup can lead to a disruption of the esterified CoA:free CoA ratio and ultimately to mitochondrial toxicity. Detoxification of these metabolic end products occurs via the transfer of the propionyl moiety to carnitine-forming propionyl-carnitine, which is then transferred across the inner mitochondrial membrane. 3-Hydroxypropionic acid is then released as the free acid. As an industrial chemical, it is used in the production of various chemicals such as acrylates in industry.| When present in sufficiently high levels, 3-hydroxypropionic acid can act as an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of hydroxypropionic acid are associated with many inborn errors of metabolism including biotinidase deficiency, malonic aciduria, methylmalonate semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency, methylmalonic aciduria, methylmalonic aciduria due to cobalamin-related disorders, and propionic acidemia. Hydroxypropionic acid is an organic acid. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. Infants with acidosis have symptoms that include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart, liver, and kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of the IEMs mentioned above. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures.|
HMDB0000379::Methylcitric acid (MCA) is elevated in body fluids of patients with propionic acidaemia (PA; OMIM 232000  , 232050  ), methylmalonic aciduria (MMA; OMIM 251000  , 251120  ) and multiple carboxylase deficiency (OMIM 253260  , 253270  ), which are inherited disorders. MCA is formed by condensation of accumulated propionyl- CoA and oxalacetate by the enzyme si-citrate synthase (EC 4.1.3.7). MCA molecule has two stereogenic centers so that it can occur in the form of four stereoisomers. Only two stereoisomers of MCA, (2S, 3S) and (2R, 3S), were found in human urine (PMID: 17295121  ).|
HMDB0000695::Ketoleucine is an abnormal metabolite that arises from the incomplete breakdown of branched-chain amino acids. Ketoleucine is both a neurotoxin and a metabotoxin. A neurotoxin causes damage to nerve cells and nerve tissues. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of ketoleucine are associated with maple syrup urine disease (MSUD). MSUD is a metabolic disorder caused by a deficiency of the branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase complex (BCKDC), leading to a buildup of the branched-chain amino acids (leucine, isoleucine, and valine) and their toxic by-products (ketoacids) in the blood and urine. The symptoms of MSUD often show in infancy and lead to severe brain damage if untreated. MSUD may also present later depending on the severity of the disease. If left untreated in older individuals, during times of metabolic crisis, symptoms of the condition include uncharacteristically inappropriate, extreme, or erratic behaviour and moods, hallucinations, anorexia, weight loss, anemia, diarrhea, vomiting, dehydration, lethargy, oscillating hypertonia and hypotonia, ataxia, seizures, hypoglycemia, ketoacidosis, opisthotonus, pancreatitis, rapid neurological decline, and coma.  In maple syrup urine disease, the brain concentration of branched-chain ketoacids can increase 10- to 20-fold. This leads to a depletion of glutamate and a consequent reduction in the concentration of brain glutamine, aspartate, alanine, and other amino acids. The result is a compromise of energy metabolism because of a failure of the malate-aspartate shuttle and a diminished rate of protein synthesis (PMID: 15930465  ).|
HMDB0000022::3-methoxytyramine, also known as 4-(2-amino-Ethyl)-2-methoxy-phenol or 3-O-Methyldopamine, is classified as a member of the Methoxyphenols. Methoxyphenols are compounds containing a methoxy group attached to the benzene ring of a phenol moiety. 3-methoxytyramine is considered to be slightly soluble (in water) and acidic.  3-methoxytyramine can be found primarily in human brain and most tissues tissues; and in blood, cerebrospinal fluid (csf) or urine. Within a cell, 3-methoxytyramine is primarily located in the cytoplasm|
HMDB0000306::Tyramine is a monoamine compound derived from the amino acid tyrosine. Tyramine is metabolized by the enzyme monoamine oxidase. In foods, it is often produced by the decarboxylation of tyrosine during fermentation or decay. Foods containing considerable amounts of tyramine include fish, chocolate, alcoholic beverages, cheese, soy sauce, sauerkraut, and processed meat. A large dietary intake of tyramine can cause an increase in systolic blood pressure of 30 mmHg or more. Tyramine acts as a neurotransmitter via a G protein-coupled receptor with high affinity for tyramine called TA1. The TA1 receptor is found in the brain as well as peripheral tissues including the kidney. An indirect sympathomimetic, Tyramine can also serve as a substrate for adrenergic uptake systems and monoamine oxidase so it prolongs the actions of adrenergic transmitters. It also provokes transmitter release from adrenergic terminals. Tyramine is a biomarker for the consumption of cheese|
HMDB0000767::Pseudouridine is the C-glycoside isomer of the nucleoside uridine, and it is the most prevalent of the over one hundred different modified nucleosides found in RNA. Pseudouridine is found in all species and in all classes of RNA except mRNA. It is formed by enzymes called pseudouridine synthases, which post-transcriptionally isomerize specific uridine residues in RNA (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0000812::N-Acetylaspartic acid is a derivative of aspartic acid. It is the second most concentrated molecule in the brain after the amino acid glutamate. It is synthesized in neurons from the amino acid aspartate and acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl CoA). The various functions served by N-acetylaspartic acid are still under investigation, but the primary proposed functions include (1) acting as a neuronal osmolyte that is involved in fluid balance in the brain, (2) serving as a source of acetate for lipid and myelin synthesis in oligodendrocytes (the glial cells that myelinate neuronal axons), (3) serving as a precursor for the synthesis of the important dipeptide neurotransmitter N-acetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG), and (4) playing a potential role in energy production from the amino acid glutamate in neuronal mitochondria. High neurotransmitter levels can lead to abnormal neural signaling, delayed or arrested intellectual development, and difficulties with general motor skills.| When present in sufficiently high levels, N-acetylaspartic acid can be a neurotoxin, an acidogen, and a metabotoxin. A neurotoxin is a compound that disrupts or attacks neural tissue. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of N-acetylaspartic acid are associated with Canavan disease. N-acetylaspartic acid is an organic acid. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. Infants with acidosis have symptoms that include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and flapping tremors.|
HMDB0000226::Orotic acid is a minor dietary constituent. Indeed, until it was realized that it could be synthesized by humans, orotic acid was known as vitamin B-13. The richest dietary sources of orotic acid are cow's milk and other dairy products as well as root vegetables such as carrots and beets. Dietary intake probably contributes to a basal rate of orotic acid excretion in urine because fasting decreases excretion by ~50%. However, it is now apparent that most urinary orotic acid is synthesized in the body, where it arises as an intermediate in the pathway for the synthesis of pyrimidine nucleotides. Orotic acid is converted to UMP by UMP synthase, a multifunctional protein with both orotate phosphoribosyltransferase and orotidylate decarboxylase activity.| The most frequently observed inborn error of pyrimidine nucleotide synthesis is a mutation of the multifunctional protein UMP synthase (UMP synthase deficiency or orotic aciduria). This disorder prevents the conversion of orotic acid to UMP, and thus to other pyrimidines. As a result, plasma orotic acid accumulates to high concentrations, and increased quantities appear in the urine. Indeed, urinary orotic acid is so markedly increased in individuals harboring a mutation in UMP synthase that orotic acid crystals can form in the urine. The urinary concentration of orotic acid in individuals suffering from orotic aciduria can be of the order of millimoles per millimole creatinine. By comparison, the urinary level in unaffected individuals is ~ 1 µmol/mmol creatinine (PMID: 17513443  ). Orotic aciduria is characterized by megaloblastic anemia and orotic acid crystalluria that is frequently associated with some degree of physical and mental retardation. These features respond to appropriate pyrimidine replacement therapy and most cases appear to have a good prognosis. When present in sufficiently high levels, orotic acid can act as an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of orotic acid are associated with at least seven inborn errors of metabolism, including argininemia, LPI syndrome (lysinuric protein intolerance), hyperornithinemia-hyperammonemia-homocitrullinuria (HHH), OTC deficiency, citrullinemia type I, purine nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency, and orotic aciduria.| Orotic acid is an organic acid. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of the untreated IEMs mentioned above. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures.|
HMDB0000125::Glutathione is a compound synthesized from cysteine, perhaps the most important member of the body's toxic waste disposal team. Like cysteine, glutathione contains the crucial thiol (-SH) group that makes it an effective antioxidant. There are virtually no living organisms on this planet-animal or plant whose cells don't contain some glutathione. Scientists have speculated that glutathione was essential to the very development of life on earth. glutathione has many roles; in none does it act alone. It is a coenzyme in various enzymatic reactions. The most important of these are redox reactions, in which the thiol grouping on the cysteine portion of cell membranes protects against peroxidation; and conjugation reactions, in which glutathione (especially in the liver) binds with toxic chemicals in order to detoxify them. glutathione is also important in red and white blood cell formation and throughout the immune system.| glutathione's clinical uses include the prevention of oxygen toxicity in hyperbaric oxygen therapy, treatment of lead and other heavy metal poisoning, lowering of the toxicity of chemotherapy and radiation in cancer treatments, and reversal of cataracts. (http://www.dcnutrition.com/AminoAcids/) glutathione participates in leukotriene synthesis and is a cofactor for the enzyme glutathione peroxidase. It is also important as a hydrophilic molecule that is added to lipophilic toxins and waste in the liver during biotransformation before they can become part of the bile.| glutathione is also needed for the detoxification of methylglyoxal, a toxin produced as a by-product of metabolism. This detoxification reaction is carried out by the glyoxalase system. Glyoxalase I (EC 4.4.1.5) catalyzes the conversion of methylglyoxal and reduced glutathione to S-D-Lactoyl-glutathione. Glyoxalase II (EC 3.1.2.6) catalyzes the hydrolysis of S-D-Lactoyl-glutathione to glutathione and D-lactate. GSH is known as a substrate in both conjugation reactions and reduction reactions, catalyzed by glutathione S-transferase enzymes in cytosol, microsomes, and mitochondria. However, it is also capable of participating in non-enzymatic conjugation with some chemicals, as in the case of n-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI), the reactive cytochrome P450-reactive metabolite formed by acetaminophen, that becomes toxic when GSH is depleted by an overdose (of acetaminophen). glutathione in this capacity binds to NAPQI as a suicide substrate and in the process detoxifies it, taking the place of cellular protein thiol groups which would otherwise be covalently modified; when all GSH has been spent, NAPQI begins to react with the cellular proteins, killing the cells in the process. The preferred treatment for an overdose of this painkiller is the administration (usually in atomized form) of N-acetylcysteine, which is used by cells to replace spent GSSG and renew the usable GSH pool. (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/glutathione).|
HMDB0000195::Inosine is a purine nucleoside that has hypoxanthine linked by the N9 nitrogen to the C1 carbon of ribose. It is an intermediate in the degradation of purines and purine nucleosides to uric acid and in pathways of purine salvage. It also occurs in the anticodon of certain transfer RNA molecules (Dorland, 28th ed). Inosine is found to be associated with purine nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency and xanthinuria type I, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000044::Ascorbic acid is found naturally in citrus fruits and many vegetables and is an essential nutrient in human diets. It is necessary to maintain connective tissue and bone. The biologically active form of ascorbic acid is vitamin C. Vitamin C is a water soluble vitamin. Primates (including humans) and a few other species in all divisions of the animal kingdom, notably the guinea pig, have lost the ability to synthesize ascorbic acid and must obtain it in their food. Vitamin C functions as a reducing agent and coenzyme in several metabolic pathways. Vitamin C is considered an antioxidant (PubChem). Ascorbic acid is an electron donor for enzymes involved in collagen hydroxylation, biosynthesis of carnitine and norepinephrine, tyrosine metabolism, and amidation of peptide hormones. Ascrobic acid (vitamin C) deficiency causes scurvy. The amount of vitamin C necessary to prevent scurvy may not be adequate to maintain optimal health. The ability of vitamin C to donate electrons also makes it a potent water-soluble antioxidant that readily scavenges free radicals such as molecular oxygen, superoxide, hydroxyl radical, and hypochlorous acid. In this setting, several mechanisms could account for a link between vitamin C and heart disease. One is the relation between LDL oxidation and vitamins C and E. Vitamin C in vitro can recycle vitamin E, which can donate electrons to prevent LDL oxidation in vitro. As the lipid-phase vitamin E is oxidized, it can be regenerated by aqueous vitamin C. Other possibilities are that vitamin C could decrease cholesterol by mechanisms not well characterized, or could improve vasodilatation and vascular reactivity, perhaps by decreasing the interactions of nitric oxide with oxidants (PMID: 10799361  ). Moreover, ascorbic acid is found to be associated with hyperoxalemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000273::Thymidine is non-toxic and is a naturally occurring compound that exists in all living organisms and DNA viruses. 25% of DNA is composed of thymidine. RNA does not have thymidine and has uridine instead. Thymidine is a chemical compound which is a pyrimidine nucleoside. Thymidine is the DNA base T, which pairs with adenosine in double stranded DNA.|
HMDB0001067::N-Acetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG) is a neuropeptide found in millimolar concentrations in brain that is localized to subpopulations of glutamatergic, cholinergic, GABAergic, and noradrenergic neuronal systems. NAAG is released upon depolarization by a Ca(2+)-dependent process and is an agonist at mGluR3 receptors and an antagonist at NMDA receptors. NAAG is catabolized to N-acetylaspartate and glutamate primarily by glutamate carboxypeptidase II, which is expressed on the extracellular surface of astrocytes. The levels of NAAG and the activity of carboxypeptidase II are altered in a regionally specific fashion in several neuropsychiatric disorders. (PMID 9361299  ). N-Acetylaspartylglutamic acid (NAAG) is a purported precursor of N-Acetylaspartic acid (NAA) and is present at about one-tenth of the concentration of NAA in the brain. NAAG has been reported to activate N-methyl- D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptors in neurons. Previous immunohistochemical studies in the vertebrate central nervous system (CNS) have suggested that NAAG is exclusively localized to neurons. Recent evidence, however, indicates that NAAG might also be localized to nonneuronal cells within the CNS. Only traces of NAA and NAAG are detectable in other tissues. Some compounds can change levels of NAA and NAAG in the brain. For example, methylphenidante increases the levels of NAA and NAAG in the cerebral cortex; amphetamine also increases NAA concentration in a mature brain by 26%, raising the possibility that other neurochemical systems might be involved in the clinical effects of stimulants. (PMID: 10603234  ).|
HMDB0011600::3-Methyladenine, also known as 3-ma nucleobase, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as 6-aminopurines. These are purines that carry an amino group at position 6. Purine is a bicyclic aromatic compound made up of a pyrimidine ring fused to an imidazole ring. 3-Methyladenine is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak acidic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). 3-Methyladenine has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. 3-Methyladenine exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans.|
HMDB0003099::1-Methyluric acid is one of the three main theophylline metabolites in man. 1-Methyluric acid is one of the purine components in urinary calculi. Methylated purines originate from the metabolism of methylxanthines (caffeine, theophylline, and theobromine). Methyluric acids can be distinguished from uric acid via simple methods routinely used in clinical laboratories, requiring the use of high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Purine derivatives in urinary calculi could be considered markers of abnormal purine metabolism. The content of a purine derivative in stone depends on its average urinary excretion in the general population, similarity to the chemical structure of uric acid, and content of the latter in stone. This suggests that purines in stones represent a solid solution with uric acid as solvent. It is also plausible that methylxanthines, ubiquitous components of the diet and drugs, are involved in the pathogenesis of urolithiasis. Caffeine is metabolized via successive pathways mainly catalyzed by CYP1A2, xanthine oxidase, or N-acetyltransferase-2 to give 14 different metabolites. CYP1A2 activity shows an inter-individual variability among the population. CYP1A2, an isoform of the CYP1A cytochrome P450 superfamily, is involved in the metabolism of many drugs and plays a potentially important role in the induction of chemical carcinogenesis (PMID: 11712316  , 15833286  , 3506820  , 15013152  , 4039734  , 9890610  ).|
HMDB0000623::Dodecanedioic acid is a dicarboxylic acid which is water soluble and involves in a metabolic pathway intermediate to those of lipids and carbohydrates. (PMID 9591306  ). Dodecanedioid acid is an indicator of hepatic carnitine palmitoyltransferase I (CPT IA) deficiency. CPT IA deficiency is characterized by hypoketotic dicarboxylic aciduria with high urinary levels of dodecanedioic acid. This C12 dicarboxylic aciduria suggests that carnitine palmitoyltransferase I may play a role in the uptake of long-chain dicarboxylic acids by mitochondria after their initial shortening by beta-oxidation in peroxisomes. (PMID: 16146704  ).|
HMDB0000824::Propionylcarnitine is present in high abundance in the urine of patients with Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (MUT) deficiency, (together with Methylmalonic acid). MUT is a mitochondrial enzyme that catalyzes the isomerization of methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA (OMIM 609058   ). Propionylcarnitine is found to be associated with propionic acidemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0002013::Butyrylcarnitine, also known as (3R)-3-(butyryloxy)-4-(trimethylammonio)butanoate or L-carnitine butyryl ester, is classified as a member of the acylcarnitines. Acylcarnitines are organic compounds containing a fatty acid with the carboxylic acid attached to carnitine through an ester bond. Butyrylcarnitine is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and acidic. Butyrylcarnitine is elevated in patients with short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCAD) deficiency, in infants with acute acidosis and generalized muscle weakness, and in middle-aged patients with chronic myopathy localized in muscle (OMIM: 201470  ).|
HMDB0000688::Isovalerylcarnitine is the phenotypic abnormality in isovaleric acidemia (OMIM 243500  ) resulting from an accumulation of isovaleric acid, which is toxic to the central nervous system. Isovaleric acidemia is an autosomal recessive inborn error of leucine metabolism caused by a deficiency of the mitochondrial enzyme isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase (EC 1.3.99.10) resulting in the accumulation of derivatives of isovaleryl-CoA. It was the first organic acidemia recognized in humans and can cause significant morbidity and mortality. Early diagnosis and treatment with a protein restricted diet and supplementation with carnitine and glycine are effective in promoting normal development in severely affected individuals. An alternative pathway through glycine-N-acylase (EC 2.3.1.13) allows detoxification by producing isovalerylglycine, which is excreted. Thus, isovalerylcarnitine and isovalerylglycine are the hallmarks of this disorder in plasma and urine, respectively, and are elevated regardless of a patient's metabolic condition (PMID: 16602101  ). Moreover, isovalerylcarnitine is found to be associated with celiac disease and very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (VLCAD), which are also inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0002366::Tiglylcarnitine is detected in the urinary organic acid and blood spot acylcarnitine profiles in patients with mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (T2) deficiency, an inborn error of metabolism affecting isoleucine and ketone bodies in the catabolic process (PMID: 14518824  ). Tiglylcarnitine is found to be associated with celiac disease, which is also an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000756::L-Hexanoylcarnitine is an acylcarnitine. Numerous disorders have been described that lead to disturbances in energy production and in intermediary metabolism in the organism which are characterized by the production and excretion of unusual acylcarnitines. A mutation in the gene coding for carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase or the OCTN2 transporter aetiologically causes a carnitine deficiency that results in poor intestinal absorption of dietary L-carnitine, its impaired reabsorption by the kidney and, consequently, in increased urinary loss of L-carnitine. Determination of the qualitative pattern of acylcarnitines can be of diagnostic and therapeutic importance. The betaine structure of carnitine requires special analytical procedures for recording. The ionic nature of L-carnitine causes a high water solubility which decreases with increasing chain length of the ester group in the acylcarnitines. Therefore, the distribution of L-carnitine and acylcarnitines in various organs is defined by their function and their physico-chemical properties as well. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) permits screening for free and total carnitine, as well as complete quantitative acylcarnitine determination, including the long-chain acylcarnitine profile. (PMID: 17508264  , Monatshefte fuer Chemie (2005), 136(8), 1279-1291., Int J Mass Spectrom. 1999;188:39-52.). Hexanoylcarnitine is a medium-chain acylcarnitine present in the urine of patients with medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (PubMed 1635814). L-Hexanoylcarnitine is also found to be associated with celiac disease, which is another inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000791::L-Octanoylcarnitine is the physiologically active form of octanoylcarnitine (PMID 11274033  ). Octanoylcarnitine is detected in medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency. MCAD is characterized by intolerance to prolonged fasting, recurrent episodes of hypoglycemic coma with medium-chain dicarboxylic aciduria, impaired ketogenesis, and low plasma and tissue carnitine levels (OMIM 201450  ). L-Octanoylcarnitine is also found to be associated with celiac disease and glutaric aciduria II, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000651::Decanoylcarnitine is a member of the class of compounds known as acylcarnitines. Acylcarnitines are organic compounds containing a fatty acid with the carboxylic acid attached to carnitine through an ester bond. Thus, decanoylcarnitine is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. Decanoylcarnitine is practically insoluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Decanoylcarnitine can be found in blood, feces, and urine. Within the cell, decanoylcarnitine is primarily located in the membrane. It can also be found in the extracellular space. Acylcarnitines are useful in the diagnosis of genetic disorders such as fatty acid oxidation disorders and differentiation between biochemical phenotypes of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency disorders (PMID: 12385891  ). Moreover, decanoylcarnitine is found to be associated with very long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLAD) deficiency, glutaric aciduria II, and celiac disease, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0002250::Dodecanoylcarnitine is an acylcarnitine is present in fatty acid oxidation disorders such as long-chain acyl CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, carnitine palmitoyltransferase I deficiency, and carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency (PMID 12828998  ). Moreover, dodecanoylcarnitine is found to be associated with celiac disease, which is also an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000222::L-palmitoylcarnitine is a long-chain acyl fatty acid derivative ester of carnitine which facilitates the transfer of long-chain fatty acids from cytoplasm into mitochondria during the oxidation of fatty acids. L-palmitoylcarnitine, due to its amphipatic character is, like detergents, a surface-active molecule and by changing the membrane fluidity and surface charge can change activity of several enzymes and transporters localized in the membrane. L-palmitoylcarnitine has been also reported to change the activity of certain proteins. On the contrary to carnitine, palmitoylcarnitine was shown to stimulate the activity of caspases 3, 7 and 8 and the level of this long-chain acylcarnitine increased during apoptosis. Palmitoylcarnitine was also reported to diminish completely binding of phorbol esters, the protein kinase C activators and to decrease the autophosphorylation of the enzyme. Apart from these isoform nonspecific phenomena, palmitoylcarnitine was also shown to be responsible for retardation in cytoplasm of protein kinase C isoforms β and δ and, in the case of the latter one, to decrease its interaction with GAP-43. Some of the physico-chemical properties of palmitoylcarnitine may help to explain the need for coenzyme A-carnitine-coenzyme A acyl exchange during mitochondrial fatty acid import. The amphiphilic character of palmitoylcarnitine may also explain its proposed involvement in the pathogenesis of myocardial ischemia. L-palmitoylcarnitine accumulates in ischemic myocardium and potentially contribute to myocardial damage through alterations in membrane molecular dynamics, one mechanism through which could play an important role in ischemic injury. Palmitoylcarnitine is characteristically elevated in carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency, late-onset (OMIM 255110   PMID 2540838  , 15363641  , 8706815  ). Moreover, L-palmitoylcarnitine is found to be associated with celiac disease, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000848::Stearoylcarnitine, also known as acylcarnitine C18:0, is a fatty ester lipid molecule. It is found in significantly greater amounts of patients with carnitine palmitoyltransferase (CPT) II deficiency when compared to controls (PMID: 15653102  ). Stearoylcarnitine is also found to be associated with celiac disease, another inborn error of metabolism. The carnitine palmitoyltransferase (CPT; EC 2.3.1.21) enzyme system, in conjunction with acyl-CoA synthetase and carnitine/acylcarnitine translocase, provides the mechanism whereby long-chain fatty acids are transferred from the cytosol to the mitochondrial matrix to undergo beta-oxidation (OMIM: 600650   ). Stearoylcarnitine is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and acidic.|
HMDB0000740::Lactulose is a synthetic disaccharide used in the treatment of constipation and hepatic encephalopathy. It has also been used in the diagnosis of gastrointestinal disorders (From Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th ed, p887). Moreover, lactulose is found to be associated with celiac disease, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0001491::This is the active form of vitamin B6 serving as a coenzyme for synthesis of amino acids, neurotransmitters (serotonin, norepinephrine), sphingolipids, aminolevulinic acid. During transamination of amino acids, pyridoxal phosphate is transiently converted into pyridoxamine phosphate (pyridoxamine). -- Pubchem; Pyridoxal-phosphate (PLP, pyridoxal-5'-phosphate) is a cofactor of many enzymatic reactions. It is the active form of vitamin B6 which comprises three natural organic compounds, pyridoxal, pyridoxamine and pyridoxine. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0013316::, also known as tridecyl alcohol or 1-tridecanol, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as long-chain fatty alcohols. These are fatty alcohols that have an aliphatic tail of 13 to 21 carbon atoms. Thus, is considered to be a fatty alcohol lipid molecule. exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. has a musty taste. has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0030930::, also known as tridecene, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as unsaturated aliphatic hydrocarbons. These are aliphatic Hydrocarbons that contains one or more unsaturated carbon atoms. These compounds contain one or more double or triple bonds. Thus, is considered to be a hydrocarbon lipid molecule. exists as a liquid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). Outside of the human body, can be found in fats and oils, fruits, milk and milk products, and nuts. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0033742::(S)-2-Methylbutanoic acid, also known as (S)-2-methylbutanoate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as methyl-branched fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an acyl chain that has a methyl branch. Usually, they are saturated and contain only one or more methyl group. However, branches other than methyl may be present (S)-2-Methylbutanoic acid is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa) (S)-2-Methylbutanoic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as saliva, feces, and urine. Within the cell, (S)-2-methylbutanoic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and adiposome (S)-2-Methylbutanoic acid is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, lovastatin, egonol-2'''-methyl butanoate, and mevinolinic acid. Outside of the human body, (S)-2-methylbutanoic acid can be found in fats and oils. This makes (S)-2-methylbutanoic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product.|
HMDB0002055::o-Cresol is a minor urinary metabolite of toluene, a widely used chemical with neurotoxicological properties. (PMID: 15687000  ). o-Cresol is used commercially as a disinfectant. Exposure may occur by inhalation, by cutaneous adsorption or by oral ingestion. o-Cresol denature and precipitate cellular proteins and thus may rapidly cause poisoning. o-Cresol is metabolized by conjugation and oxidation. Ingestion of o-Cresol cause intense burning of mouth and throat, followed by marked abdominal pain and distress. The minimum lethal dose of cresol by mouth is about 2 g. (PMID 15040915  ).|
HMDB0031295::, also known as 3-oxooctane or amyl ethyl ketone, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as ketones. These are organic compounds in which a carbonyl group is bonded to two carbon atoms R2C=O (neither R may be a hydrogen atom). Ketones that have one or more alpha-hydrogen atoms undergo keto-enol tautomerization, the tautomer being an enol. Thus, is considered to be an oxygenated hydrocarbon lipid molecule. exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. can be biosynthesized from octane. is a sweet, butter, and fresh tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as rocket salad (ssp.), sweet basil, lemon balm, and rosemary. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0033547::3-Octen-2-one is found in alcoholic beverages. Vanilla volatile, mushroom flavour component of Boletus edulis (porcini). Also present in asparagus, baked or French fried potato, raw lean fish, chicken fat, white wine, roasted filbert, coriander seed and rice. 3-Octen-2-one is a flavouring ingredient.|
HMDB0001184::Methyl propenyl ketone is a volatile organic compound. Methyl propenyl ketone is occasionally found as a volatile component of normal human biofluids. It is found as a volatile in the hawthorn fruit upon ripening, and also is part of the scent components of the urine of some animals. (PMID: 5556886  , 16770722  , 15739361  , 914932  ).|
HMDB0033116::4-Methylthiazole is found in animal foods. 4-Methylthiazole is a flavouring ingredient. 4-Methylthiazole is present in asparagus, cooked beef, cooked pork, pork liver, coffee, roast barley, roast peanut and cooked shrimp.|
HMDB0011623::Decanal is an organic compound with the chemical formula C9H19CHO. It is the simplest ten-carbon aldehyde. Decanal occurs naturally and is used in fragrances and flavoring. Decanal occurs in nature and is an important component in citrus along with octanal, citral, and sinensal. Decanal is also an important component of buckwheat odour (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0034121::1-Methoxy-4-(2-propenyl)benzene is found in allspice. 1-Methoxy-4-(2-propenyl)benzene is a constituent of many essential oils. 1-Methoxy-4-(2-propenyl)benzene is found in apple, bilberry and orange fruits and juices. 1-Methoxy-4-(2-propenyl)benzene is a flavouring agent.|
HMDB0005994::Hexanal is an alkyl aldehyde found in human biofluids. Human milk samples collected from women contains hexanal. Among mediators of oxidative stress, highly reactive secondary aldehydic lipid peroxidation products can initiate the processes of spontaneous mutagenesis and carcinogenesis and can also act as a growth-regulating factors and signaling molecules. In specimens obtained from adult patients with brain astrocytomas, lower levels of n-hexanal are associated with poorer patient prognosis. Hexanal is a volatile compound that has been associated with the development of undesirable flavours. The content of hexanal, which is a major breakdown product of linoleic acid (LA, n - 6 PUFA) oxidation, has been used to follow the course of lipid oxidation and off-flavour development in foods, and have been proposed as one potential marker of milk quality. A "cardboard-like" off-flavour is frequently associated with dehydrated milk products. This effect is highly correlated with the headspace concentration of hexanal. (Food Chemistry. Volume 107, Issue 1, 1 March 2008, Pages 558-569, PMID: 17934948  , 17487452  ).|
HMDB0034235::2-Pentanone is found in apple. 2-Pentanone is isolated from soya oil (Glycine max), pineapple and a few other plant sources Pentan-2-one or methyl propyl ketone is a colorless liquid ketone with an odor resembling that of acetone. Its formula is C5H10O. It is sometimes used in very small amounts as a flavoring food additive. Two other ketones, 3-pentanone and methyl isopropyl ketone are isomers of 2-pentanone|
HMDB0031269::(E)-2-Nonenal is found in alcoholic beverages. (E)-2-Nonenal is widespread in nature, in beer, coffee, watermelon, cucumbers, redcurrants, orris oil, palm oil, potatoes etc. (E)-2-Nonenal is a flavouring ingredien|
HMDB0004327::1-Butanol, which is also known as n-butanol or 1-butanol or butyl alcohol (sometimes also called biobutanol when produced biologically), is an alcohol with a 4 carbon structure and the molecular formula of C4H10O. It is primarily used as a solvent, as an intermediate in chemical synthesis, and as a fuel. There are four isomeric structures for butanol. The straight chain isomer with the alcohol at an internal carbon is sec-butanol or 2-butanol. The branched isomer with the alcohol at a terminal carbon is isobutanol, and the branched isomer with the alcohol at the internal carbon is tert-butanol. 1-Butanol is produced in small amounts by gut microbial fermenetation through the butanoate metabolic pathway.|
HMDB0031507::1-Hydroxy-2-butanone, also known as 2-oxobutanol or fema 3173, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as alpha-hydroxy ketones. These are organic compounds containing a carboxylic acid, and an amine group attached to the alpha carbon atom, relative to the C=O group. 1-Hydroxy-2-butanone is soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 1-Hydroxy-2-butanone has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, 1-hydroxy-2-butanone is primarily located in the cytoplasm. 1-Hydroxy-2-butanone can be biosynthesized from butan-2-one and butane-1,2-diol. 1-Hydroxy-2-butanone is a sweet, butterscotch, and coffee tasting compound that can be found in coffee and coffee products and mushrooms. This makes 1-hydroxy-2-butanone a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. 1-Hydroxy-2-butanone has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0031299::(R)-1-Octen-3-ol is found in herbs and spices. (R)-1-Octen-3-ol is isolated from a number of essential oils, e.g. lavender, leek, mint and mushrooms. (R)-1-Octen-3-ol is a food odorant responsible for typical mushroom odour. (R)-1-Octen-3-ol is a flavouring ingredien|
HMDB0000820::Propyl alcohol is a colorless liquid made by oxidation of aliphatic hydrocarbons that is used as a solvent and chemical intermediate. Propyl alcohol is a primary alcohol with the formula CH3CH2CH2OH. It is also known as propan-1-ol, 1-propanol, 1-propyl alcohol, n-propyl alcohol, or simply propanol. It is an isomer of propan-2-ol. It is used as a solvent in the pharmaceutical industry, and for resins and cellulose esters. It is formed naturally in small amounts during many fermentation processes and small amounts are produced by gut microflora.|
HMDB0061923::1,3-Di-tert-butylbenzene belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenylpropanes. These are organic compounds containing a phenylpropane moiety. 1,3-Di-tert-butylbenzene is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. 1,3-Di-tert-butylbenzene has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. 1,3-Di-tert-butylbenzene has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0031409::, also known as N-C8H17COCH3 or decan-2-one, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as ketones. These are organic compounds in which a carbonyl group is bonded to two carbon atoms R2C=O (neither R may be a hydrogen atom). Ketones that have one or more alpha-hydrogen atoms undergo keto-enol tautomerization, the tautomer being an enol. Thus, is considered to be an oxygenated hydrocarbon lipid molecule. exists as a liquid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). can be biosynthesized from decane. is a fatty, floral, and orange tasting compound that can be found in corn and herbs and spices. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0031019::, also known as dodecan-2-one or dodecanone-(2), belongs to the class of organic compounds known as ketones. These are organic compounds in which a carbonyl group is bonded to two carbon atoms R2C=O (neither R may be a hydrogen atom). Ketones that have one or more alpha-hydrogen atoms undergo keto-enol tautomerization, the tautomer being an enol. Thus, is considered to be an oxygenated hydrocarbon lipid molecule. exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). is a citrus, floral, and fruity tasting compound that can be found in alcoholic beverages, fats and oils, garden tomato, and herbs and spices. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0003671::2-Heptanone is a ketone with the molecular formula C7H14O. It is a colorless to white liquid with a banana-like, fruity odor. 2-Heptanone is one of the metabolites of n-heptane found in the urine of employees exposed to heptane in shoe and tire factories.|
HMDB0005842::2-Oxohexane is a volatile organic compound. 2-Oxohexane is occasionally found as a volatile component of normal human biofluids. 2-Oxohexane is an hexacarbon solvent; the neurotoxicity of hexacarbon solvents has become apparent and an extensive literature has already developed as a result of the clinical and epidemiological implications of the human disease. The main neurological disorders associated with chronic volatile substance are peripheral neuropathy, cerebellar disease, chronic encephalopathy and dementia. Apart from peripheral neuropathy, the clinical features are non-specific, evidence for solvent-related toxicity is in most cases circumstantial and there is no clear dose/response relationship. (PMID: 5556886  , 6278344  , 2550357  ).|
HMDB0031525::(S)-2-Methylbutanal belongs to the class of organic compounds known as short-chain aldehydes. These are an aldehyde with a chain length containing between 2 and 5 carbon atoms (S)-2-Methylbutanal is soluble (in water) and an extremely weak acidic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa) (S)-2-Methylbutanal has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, (S)-2-methylbutanal is primarily located in the cytoplasm (S)-2-Methylbutanal can be converted into (1E,2S)-2-methylbutanal oxime and (1Z,2S)-2-methylbutanal oxime. Outside of the human body, (S)-2-methylbutanal can be found in coffee and coffee products, herbs and spices, and tea. This makes (S)-2-methylbutanal a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products (S)-2-Methylbutanal has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0031526::2-Methylbutanal belongs to the class of organic compounds known as short-chain aldehydes. These are an aldehyde with a chain length containing between 2 and 5 carbon atoms. 2-Methylbutanal is soluble (in water) and an extremely weak acidic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). 2-Methylbutanal has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, 2-methylbutanal is primarily located in the cytoplasm. 2-Methylbutanal exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. 2-Methylbutanal has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0033916::2-Nonanol is found in alcoholic beverages. 2-Nonanol is isolated from various essential oils, orange (Citrus sinensis), ginger (Zingiber officinale), coconut (Coces nucifera). Also present in guava fruit, raw asparagus, various cheeses and wines.|
HMDB0031266::2-Nonanone is found in alcoholic beverages. 2-Nonanone is present in banana, ginger, Brazil nut, attar of rose, clove oil, coconut oil, passionflower, sorghum, asparagus, tomato, corn, wine, cheese, beer, blackcurrant buds, melon, and strawberry jam. 2-Nonanone is a flavor and fragrance agent. It is a clear slightly yellow liquid. Ketones, such as 2-Nonanone, are reactive with many acids and bases liberating heat and flammable gases (e.g., H2). The amount of heat may be sufficient to start a fire in the unreacted portion of the ketone. Ketones react with reducing agents such as hydrides, alkali metals, and nitrides to produce flammable gas (H2) and heat. Ketones are incompatible with isocyanates, aldehydes, cyanides, peroxides, and anhydrides. They react violently with aldehydes, HNO3, HNO3 + H2O2, and HClO4.|
HMDB0013824::2-pentylfuran is a colourless to light yellow liquid that is not known to be produced by mammalian metabolism. It is present in many foods including alcoholic beverages, coffee, potatoes, tomatoes, roasted filberts, and soybean oil, and it is also a component of the aroma of these foods. 2-pentylfuran is a flavouring ingredient. 2-pentylfuran belongs to the furan family which is characterized by a furan ring (a five-member aromatic ring with one oxygen atom and four carbon atoms). A study showed that 2-pentylfuran is found in the breath of patients with Aspergillus fumigatus infections (PMID: 19301177  ).|
HMDB0001659::Acetone is one of the ketone bodies produced during ketoacidosis. Acetone is not regarded as a waste product of metabolism. However, its physiological role in biochemical machinery is not clear. A model for the role of acetone metabolism is presented that orders the events occurring in acetonemia in sequence: in diabetic ketosis or starvation, ketone body production (b-hydroxy-butyrate, acetoacetate) provides fuel for vital organs (heart, brain .) raising the chance of survival of the metabolic catastrophe. However, when ketone body production exceeds the degrading capacity, the accumulating acetoacetic acid presents a new challenge to the pH regulatory system. Acetone production and its further degradation to C3 fragments fulfill two purposes: the maintenance of pH buffering capacity and provision of fuel for peripheral tissues. Since ketosis develops under serious metabolic circumstances, all the mechanisms that balance or moderate the effects of ketosis enhance the chance for survival. From this point of view, the theory that transportable C3 fragments can serve as additional nutrients is a novel view of acetone metabolism which introduces a new approach to the study of acetone degradation, especially in understanding its physiological function and the interrelationship between liver and peripheral tissues. (PMID 10580530  ). Acetone is typically derived from acetoacetate through the action of microbial acetoacetate decarboxylases found in gut microflora. In chemistry, acetone is the simplest representative of the ketones. Acetone is a colorless, mobile, flammable liquid readily soluble in water, ethanol, ether, etc., and itself serves as an important solvent. Acetone is an irritant and inhalation may lead to hepatotoxic effects (causing liver damage).|
HMDB0034148::2-Tridecanone is found in citrus. 2-Tridecanone is isolated from plant oils, e.g. palm oil, coconut oil. Also found in American cranberry, rabbiteye, blueberry, raspberry, grapefruit, onion, ginger and cheeses. 2-Tridecanone is used as a flavouring essence.|
HMDB0033713::2-Undecanone is found in cloves. 2-Undecanone is found in palm kernel oil and soya bean oil. 2-Undecanone is an important constituent of rue oil (Ruta graveolens) and found in many other essential oils. Also found in black currant buds, raspberry, black berry peach and other fruits. 2-Undecanone is used in flavourings 2-Undecanone is a ketone, also known as methyl nonyl ketone (MNK). It is soluble in ethanol, benzene, chloroform, and acetone, but its large carbon chain renders it insoluble in water. Like most methyl ketones, 2-undecanone undergoes a haloform reaction when in the presence of a base. For example, the reaction between 2-undecanone and sodium hypochlorite yields sodium decanoate, chloroform, and sodium hydroxide. 2-Undecanone, also known as methyl nonyl ketone and IBI-246, is an oily organic liquid manufactured synthetically, but which can also be extracted from oil of rue. It is found naturally in bananas, cloves, ginger, guava, strawberries, and wild-grown tomatoes. 2-Undecanone is used in the perfumery and flavoring industries, but because of its strong odor it is primarily used as an insect repellent or animal repellent. Typically, 1 2% concentrations of 2-undecanone are found in dog and cat repellents in the form of a liquid, aerosol spray, or gel.|
HMDB0003407::Diacetyl is a natural by-product of secondary or malolactic fermentation. It is a vicinal diketone (two C=O groups, side-by-side) with the molecular formula C4H6O2. Carrier of aroma of butter, vinegar, coffee, and other foods. Beer sometimes undergoes a diacetyl rest, which entails waiting two or three days after fermentation is complete, to allow the yeast to absorb the diacetyl it produced earlier in the fermentation cycle. The makers of some wines, such as chardonnay, deliberately promote the production of diacetyl because of the feel and flavors it imparts.|
HMDB0003243::Acetoin is a product of fermentation. It is a component of the butanediol cycle in microorganisms. In mammals it is oxidized to carbon dioxide. -- Pubchem; '3-Hydroxybutanone, also known as acetoin or acetyl methyl carbinol, is a chemical compound composed of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. Its formula is C4H8O2. It is a colourless or pale yellow to green yellow liquid with a pleasant buttery odour. It is used as a food flavoring and a fragrance. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0006478::iso-Valeraldehyde is an oxygenated (aldehyde) volatile organic compounds (VOC), normally found in humans, particularly in the gut. iso-Valeraldehyde is a leucine degradation product that has been found in elevated concentrations in some cases of hepatic encephalopathy, however not significantly. Fermentation of carbohydrates in the gut produces ethanoic, propionic, butanoic, pentanoic, and hexanoic acid acids, particularly by Bacteroides, although it is possible that some of the iso-Valeraldehyde is of dietetic origin. iso-Valeraldehyde has been found to be a normal component of the chemical profile of cheddar cheese, spirits (beer, rum, sake, wine). (PMID: 17314143  , 18275147  , 18175918  , 16899660  ).|
HMDB0035915::Sulcatone is found in citrus. Sulcatone is present in Ceylon citronella oil, lemon-grass oil and palmarosa oil. Product of 1,3,6,10-Farnesatetraene JXF60-O oxidation in stored apples affected by superficial scald. Sulcatone is a flavouring ingredien|
HMDB0035658::(-)-alpha-Pinene is found in almond. alpha-Pinene is an organic compound of the terpene class, one of two isomers of pinene. It is found in the oils of many species of many coniferous trees, notably the pine. It is also found in the essential oil of rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis). Both enantiomers are known in nature; 1S,5S- or (-)-alpha-pinene is more common in European pines, whereas the 1R,5R- or (+)-alpha-isomer is more common in North America. The racemic mixture is present in some oils such as eucalyptus oil. (Wikipedia|
HMDB0006525::α-Pinene is an organic compound of the terpene class, one of two isomers of pinene. It is an alkene and it contains a reactive four-membered ring. It is found in the oils of many species of many coniferous trees, notably the pine. It is also found in the essential oil of rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis). Both enantiomers are known in nature; 1S,5S- or (−)-α-pinene is more common in European pines, whereas the 1R,5R- or (+)-α-isomer is more common in North America. The racemic mixture is present in some oils such as eucalyptus oil.| The four-membered ring in α-pinene 1 makes it a reactive hydrocarbon, prone to skeletal rearrangements such as the Wagner-Meerwein rearrangement. For example, attempts to perform hydration or hydrogen halide addition with the alkene functionality typically lead to rearranged products. of under acidic conditions. With concentrated sulfuric acid and ethanol the major products are terpineol 2 and its ethyl ether 3, while glacial acetic acid gives the corresponding acetate ester 4. With dilute acids, terpin hydrate 5 becomes the major product. With one molar equivalent of anhydrous HCl, the simple addition product 6a can be formed at low temperature in the presence of ether, but it is very unstable. At normal temperatures, or if no ether is present, the major product is bornyl chloride 6b, along with a small amount of fenchyl chloride 6c. For many years 6b (also called "artificial camphor") was referred to as "pinene hydrochloride", until it was confirmed as identical with bornyl chloride made from camphene. If more HCl is used, achiral 7 (dipentene hydrochloride) is the major product along with some 6b. Nitrosyl chloride followed by base leads to the oxime 8 which can be reduced to "pinylamine" 9. Both 8 and 9 are stable compounds containing an intact four-membered ring, and these compounds helped greatly in identifying this important component of the pinene skeleton. (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0036560::beta-Pinene is found in allspice. beta-Pinene is widely distributed in plants, usually associated with a-Pinene JPV84-W but in smaller amounts. beta-Pinene is found in lime peel oil, ginger, nutmeg, mace, bitter fennel, rosemary and sage. beta-Pinene is a flavour ingredient.|
HMDB0039216::, also known as fema 3393, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty acid esters. These are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. Thus, is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. has a chocolate, cocoa, and fruity taste. has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0030052::Butyl propionate, also known as fema 2211, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbon atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or an aryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group). Butyl propionate exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). Butyl propionate has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, butyl propionate is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Butyl propionate has a sweet, banana, and earthy taste. Butyl propionate has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0033933::Laurylaldehyde, also known as dodecyl aldehyde or N-dodecanal, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as medium-chain aldehydes. These are an aldehyde with a chain length containing between 6 and 12 carbon atoms. Thus, laurylaldehyde is considered to be a fatty aldehyde lipid molecule. Laurylaldehyde exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Laurylaldehyde has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, laurylaldehyde is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). Laurylaldehyde can be biosynthesized from dodecane. Laurylaldehyde is an aldehydic, citrus, and fat tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as lemon, sweet orange, rocket salad (ssp.), and mollusks. This makes laurylaldehyde a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. Laurylaldehyde has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0031444::, also known as N-dodecane or bihexyl, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as alkanes. These are acyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbons having the general formula CnH2n+2 , and therefore consisting entirely of hydrogen atoms and saturated carbon atoms. Thus, is considered to be a hydrocarbon lipid molecule. exists as a liquid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, dodecyldimethylamine N-oxide, dodecanedioic acid, and 2,7,10-trimethyldodecane. is an alkane tasting compound that can be found in black walnut, garden tomato (var.), and papaya. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0032914::2-Furancarboxaldehyde is found in allspice. 2-Furancarboxaldehyde is a flavour ingredient. 2-Furancarboxaldehyde is present in coffee, calamus, matsutake mushroom (Tricholoma matsutake), pumpkin, malt, peated malt, Bourbon vanilla, Lamb's lettuce, pimento leaf and various fruits, e.g. apple, apricot, sweet cherry, morello cherry, orange, grapefruit, Chinese quince and a common consit of essential oils.Furfural is an organic compound derived from a variety of agricultural byproducts, including corncobs, oat, wheat bran, and sawdust. (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0031475::Heptanal is found in allspice. Heptanal is found in essential oils of ylang-ylang, clary sage, California orange, bitter orange and others. Heptanal is a flavouring agent Heptanal or heptanaldehyde is an alkyl aldehyde with a strong fruity odor which is used as an ingredient in cosmetics, perfumes, and flavors. It can be obtained from castor oil by distillation under reduced pressure. Industrially, it is used in the manufacture of 1-heptanol and ethyl heptanoate|
HMDB0033792::Hexadecane is found in allspice. Hexadecane is isolated from oil of Piper longum (long pepper) Hexadecane (also called cetane) is an alkane hydrocarbon with the chemical formula C16H34. Hexadecane consists of a chain of 16 carbon atoms, with three hydrogen atoms bonded to the two end carbon atoms, and two hydrogens bonded to each of the 14 other carbon atoms. It has 10,359 constitutional isomers|
HMDB0006007::Isopentanol or Isoamyl alcohol is one of several isomers of amyl alcohol. It is a by-product of gut microbial fermentation (PMID: 17452087  ). It can be produced by 3-methylbutanal reductase (EC 1.1.1.265) from 3 methylbutanal. Isoamyl alcohol is the major higher chain alcohol in alcoholic beverages and is present in cider, mead, beer, wine, and spirits to varying degrees, being obtained by the fermentation of starches. Isopentanol has been shown to induce expression of CYP3A and CYP2E1 in human liver (PMID: 7574728  ).|
HMDB0001873::Isobutyric acid is a carboxylic or short chain fatty acid with characteristic sweat-like smell. Small amount of isobutyrate is generated via microbial (gut) metabolism. Small amounts may also be found in certain foods or fermented beverages. There is anosmia (genetic inability to smell) for the odor of isobutyric acid with a frequency of about 2.5%. (OMIM 207000  ). Isobutyric acid is slightly soluble in water but much more soluble in ethanol, ether and organic solvents. Isobutyric acid can affect people if breathed in and may be absorbed through the skin. Contact can irritate and burn the skin and eyes. Breathing Isobutyric acid can irritate the nose, throat and lungs causing coughing, wheezing and/or shortness of breath.|
HMDB0000689::Isocaproic acid, a metabolite of 20 alpha-hydroxycholesterol (PMID 14446007  ) and is an important metabolite in early placentas enabling the convertion from cholesterol to pregnenolone to Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) (PMID 11972299  ).|
HMDB0038602::Octyl acetate is found in alcoholic beverages. Octyl acetate is present in citrus peel oils, wheat bread, cheddar cheese, wines, banana, sour cherry and other foodstuffs. Octyl acetate is a flavour ingredient Octyl acetate, or octyl ethanoate, is an ester that is formed from octanol (octyl alcohol) and acetic acid. It is the basis for artificial orange flavoring.|
HMDB0034136::, also known as N-octyl butyrate or fema 2807, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty alcohol esters. These are ester derivatives of a fatty alcohol. Thus, is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. is a creamy, earthy, and fresh tasting compound that can be found in parsnip. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product. has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0034237::Propyl acetate, also known as 1-acetoxypropane or propyl ethanoate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbon atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or an aryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group). Propyl acetate exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). Propyl acetate has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, propyl acetate is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Propyl acetate exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Propyl acetate can be biosynthesized from propan-1-ol. Propyl acetate is a bitter, celery, and fruity tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as cocoa bean, muskmelon, apple, and pineapple. This makes propyl acetate a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. Propyl acetate has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0030059::, also known as propyl propanoate or fema 2958, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbon atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or an aryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group). Thus, is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, is primarily located in the cytoplasm. can be biosynthesized from propan-1-ol. is a sweet, bitter, and chemical tasting compound that can be found in black elderberry. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product. has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0034240::Styrene is found in alcoholic beverages. Styrene is present in cranberry, bilberry, currants, grapes, vinegar, parsley, milk and dairy products, whisky, cocoa, coffee, tea, roasted filberts and peanuts. Styrene is a flavouring ingredient. Polymers are used in ion-exchange resins in food processing. Indirect food additive arising from adhesives, oatings and packaging materials. Styrene, also known as vinyl benzene, is a colorless oily liquid that evaporates easily and has a sweet smell, although high concentrations confer a less pleasant odor. Styrene is the precursor to polystyrene and several copolymers. Low levels of styrene occur naturally in plants as well as a variety of foods such as fruits, vegetables, nuts, beverages, and meats. (Wikipedia|
HMDB0034283::Myristaldehyde, also known as 1-tetradecanal or CH3(CH2)12cho, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty aldehydes. These are long chain aldehydes with a chain of at least 12 carbon atoms. Thus, myristaldehyde is considered to be a fatty aldehyde lipid molecule. Myristaldehyde exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Myristaldehyde has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, saliva, and urine. Within the cell, myristaldehyde is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Myristaldehyde can be biosynthesized from tetradecane. Myristaldehyde is an amber, citrus peel, and dry tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as ceylon cinnamon, mandarin orange (clementine, tangerine), parsley, and lemon. This makes myristaldehyde a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. Myristaldehyde has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0059907::, also known as N-tetradecane or CH3-[CH2]12-CH3, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as alkanes. These are acyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbons having the general formula CnH2n+2 , and therefore consisting entirely of hydrogen atoms and saturated carbon atoms. Thus, is considered to be a hydrocarbon lipid molecule. exists as a liquid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, tetradecanedioic acid, 1,2-tetradecanediol, and 2-amino-1,3,4-tetradecanetriol. is a mild, alkane, and waxy tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as black elderberry, pepper (c. annuum), black walnut, and lemon. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0011638::1-Tetradecanol, or commonly myristyl alcohol, is a straight-chain saturated fatty alcohol, with the molecular formula C14H30O. It is a white crystalline solid that is practically insoluble in water, soluble in diethyl ether, and slightly soluble in ethanol. 1-Tetradecanol may be prepared by the reduction of myristic acid or some fatty acid esters with reagents such as lithium aluminium hydride or sodium. As with other fatty alcohols, 1-tetradecanol is used as an ingredient in cosmetics such as cold creams for its emollient properties. It is also used as an intermediate in the chemical synthesis of other products such sulfated alcohol (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0029718::Thiophene is a maillard product At room temperature, thiophene is a colorless liquid with a mildly pleasant odor reminiscent of benzene, with which thiophene shares some similarities. The high reactivity of thiophene toward sulfonation is the basis for the separation of thiophene from benzene, which are difficult to separate by distillation due to their similar boiling points (4 C difference at ambient pressure). Like benzene, thiophene forms an azeotrope with water. Not only is thiophene reactive toward electrophiles, it is also readily lithiated with butyl lithium to give 2-lithiothiophene, which is a precursor to a variety of derivatives, including dithienyl|
HMDB0036413::Alpha-Cubebene, also known as α-cubebene or alpha-cubenene, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as sesquiterpenoids. These are terpenes with three consecutive isoprene units. Alpha-Cubebene is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Alpha-Cubebene has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, Alpha-cubebene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Alpha-Cubebene is a herbal and waxy tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as pot marjoram, star anise, parsley, and ginger. This makes Alpha-cubebene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. Alpha-Cubebene has been linked to the inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease.|
HMDB0035093::D-Citronellol is found in herbs and spices, as well as bilberry. D-Citronellol is a constituent of black cumin (Nigella sativa) seeds. D-Citronellol is a common constituent of plant oils, especially in the Rutaceae|
HMDB0035094::L-Citronellol is found in herbs and spices, as well as bilberry. L-Citronellol is a constituent of geranium and citronella oils, and  is obtained mainly from geranium oil or synthetically. Citronellol occurs in many essential oils, usually as a partial racemate. It is used as a flavour in citrus compositions. Citronellol, or dihydrogeraniol, is a natural acyclic monoterpenoid. Both enantiomers occur in nature. L-Citronellol is found in the oils of rose (18-55%) and Pelargonium geraniums. (Wikipedia)|
HMDB0003352::Menthol is an alcohol produced from mint oils or prepared synthetically. Menthol is a covalent organic compound made synthetically or obtained from peppermint or other mint oils. It is a waxy, crystalline substance, clear or white in color, which is solid at room temperature and melts slightly above. The main form of menthol occurring in nature is (-)-menthol, which is assigned the (1R,2S,5R) configuration. Menthol has local anesthetic and counterirritant qualities, and it is widely used to relieve minor throat irritation.|
HMDB0031231::Xi-2-ethyl-1-hexanol, also known as fema 3151, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty alcohols. These are aliphatic alcohols consisting of a chain of a least six carbon atoms. Thus, xi-2-ethyl-1-hexanol is considered to be a fatty alcohol lipid molecule. Xi-2-ethyl-1-hexanol exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Xi-2-ethyl-1-hexanol has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, saliva, and urine. Within the cell, xi-2-ethyl-1-hexanol is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Xi-2-ethyl-1-hexanol exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Xi-2-ethyl-1-hexanol is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, bis(2-ethylhexyl) adipate, mono(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate, and isatinone b. Outside of the human body, xi-2-ethyl-1-hexanol can be found in a number of food items such as alcoholic beverages, fruits, fats and oils, and tea. This makes xi-2-ethyl-1-hexanol a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0061886::2-Hexanol (or hexan-2-ol) is a six carbon alcohol in which the OH group is located on the second carbon atom. Its chemical formula is C6H14O or C6H13OH. It is an isomer of the other hexanols. 2-Hexanol has a chiral center and can be resolved into enantiomers.|
HMDB0036792::beta-Caryophyllene, also known as caryophyllene or (−)-β-caryophyllene, is a natural bicyclic sesquiterpene that is a constituent of many essential oils including that of Syzygium aromaticum (cloves), Cannabis sativa, rosemary, and hops. It is usually found as a mixture with isocaryophyllene (the cis double bond isomer) and α-humulene (obsolete name: α-caryophyllene), a ring-opened isomer. beta-Caryophyllene is notable for having both a cyclobutane ring and a trans-double bond in a nine-membered ring, both rarities in nature (Wikipedia). beta-Caryophyllene is a sweet and dry tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as allspice, fig, pot marjoram, and roman camomile, which makes beta-caryophyllene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. beta-Caryophyllene can be found in feces and saliva.|
HMDB0034289::, also known as N-nonadecane or CH3-[CH2]17-CH3, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as alkanes. These are acyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbons having the general formula CnH2n+2 , and therefore consisting entirely of hydrogen atoms and saturated carbon atoms. Thus, is considered to be a hydrocarbon lipid molecule. exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). can be converted into 18-methylnonadecan-1-ol. is an alkane and bland tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as yellow bell pepper, pepper (spice), pepper (c. frutescens), and lemon balm. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0059886::, also known as N-pentadecane or CH3-[CH2]13-CH3, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as alkanes. These are acyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbons having the general formula CnH2n+2 , and therefore consisting entirely of hydrogen atoms and saturated carbon atoms. Thus, is considered to be a hydrocarbon lipid molecule. exists as a liquid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. has been primarily detected in saliva. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). can be converted into 14-methylpentadecan-1-ol. is an alkane and waxy tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as yellow bell pepper, summer savory, pepper (c. frutescens), and pepper (spice). This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0031563::4-Methyl-3-penten-2-one, 9CI is found in herbs and spices. 4-Methyl-3-penten-2-one, 9CI is a flavouring ingredient. 4-Methyl-3-penten-2-one, 9CI is a constituent  of Capsicum species, Osmanthus fragrans (sweet osmanthus) and other plant|
HMDB0036219::, also known as fema 3604, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty alcohol esters. These are ester derivatives of a fatty alcohol. Thus, is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as saliva and urine. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. has a fruity, green, and musty taste.|
HMDB0059901::1,2,3-Trimethylbenzene, also known as hemimellitene or hemellitol, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as benzene and substituted derivatives. These are aromatic compounds containing one monocyclic ring system consisting of benzene. 1,2,3-Trimethylbenzene exists as a liquid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. 1,2,3-Trimethylbenzene has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, 1,2,3-trimethylbenzene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). 1,2,3-Trimethylbenzene exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. 1,2,3-Trimethylbenzene can be converted into 3,4,5-trimethylphenol. Outside of the human body, 1,2,3-trimethylbenzene can be found in black walnut and corn. This makes 1,2,3-trimethylbenzene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0000128::Guanidoacetic acid is a metabolite in the Urea cycle and metabolism of amino groups, and in the metabolic pathways of several amino acids. This includes glycine, serine, threonine, arginine and proline metabolism. Guanidinoacetic acid is also a precursor of creatine, an essential substrate for muscle energy metabolism.|
HMDB0000908::Dihydrocholesterol, also known as cholestanol or zymostanol, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as cholesterols and derivatives. Cholesterols and derivatives are compounds containing a 3-hydroxylated cholestane core. Thus, dihydrocholesterol is considered to be a sterol lipid molecule. Dihydrocholesterol exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Dihydrocholesterol has been found throughout all human tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, blood, and urine. Within the cell, dihydrocholesterol is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Dihydrocholesterol participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, dihydrocholesterol can be biosynthesized from 5alpha-cholestane. Dihydrocholesterol is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, (24S)-hydroxycholestanol, 7-oxo-5alpha-cholestan-3beta-ol, and (25R)-26-hydroxycholestanol. Outside of the human body, dihydrocholesterol can be found in a number of food items such as yardlong bean, ginger, black mulberry, and biscuit. This makes dihydrocholesterol a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0001170::Lathosterol is a a sterol (a combination steroid and alcohol) and a lipid found in the cell membranes of all body tissues, and transported in the blood plasma of all animals. It is used as an indicator of whole-body cholesterol synthesis (PMID 14511438  ). Plasma lathosterol levels are significantly elevated in patients with bile acid malabsorption (PMID: 8777839  ). Lathosterol oxidase (EC 1.14.21.6) is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction 5alpha-cholest-7-en-3beta-ol + NAD(P)H + H+ + O2 cholesta-5,7-dien-3beta-ol + NAD(P)+ + 2 H2O.|
HMDB0001315::Phosphorus, in its common form, is a waxy white (or yellowish) solid that has a characteristic disagreeable smell similar to that of garlic. Pure forms of the element are colourless and transparent. This nonmetal is not soluble in water, but is soluble in carbon disulfide. The white allotrope ignites spontaneously in air; however, both white and red phosphorus burn in air to produce phosphorus pentoxide. Phosphorus is a key element in all known forms of life. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. Inorganic phosphorus in the form of the phosphate PO43- plays a major role in biological molecules such as DNA and RNA where it forms part of the structural framework of these molecules. Living cells also utilize phosphate to transport cellular energy via adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Nearly every cellular process that uses energy gets it in the form of ATP. ATP is also important for phosphorylation, a key regulatory event in cells. Phospholipids are the main structural components of all cellular membranes. Calcium phosphate salts are used by animals to stiffen their bones. An average person contains a little less than 1 kg of phosphorus, about three quarters of which is present in bones and teeth in the form of apatite. A well-fed adult in the industrialized world consumes and excretes about 1-3 g of phosphorus per day in the form of phosphate. Phosphorus is an essential mineral macronutrient, which is studied extensively in soil conservation in order to understand plant uptake from soil systems. Due to its reactivity to air and many other oxygen containing substances, phosphorus is not found free in nature, but it is widely distributed in many different minerals. Phosphorus is found to be associated with glycerol intolerance syndrome, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000876::Vitamin D3, also called cholecalciferol, is one of the forms of vitamin D. Vitamin D3 is a steroid hormone that has long been known for its important role in regulating body levels of calcium and phosphorus, in mineralization of bone, and for the assimilation of Vitamin A. It is structurally similar to steroids such as testosterone, cholesterol, and cortisol (although vitamin D3, itself, is a secosteroid).| Vitamin D3 is a derivative of 7-dehydroxycholesterol formed by ultraviolet rays breaking the C9-C10 bond. It differs from ergocalciferol in having a single bond between C22 and C23 and lacking a methyl group at C24. Vitamin D3 can also come from dietary sources, such as beef liver, cheese, egg yolks, and fatty fish (PubChem). The first step involved in the activation of vitamin D3 is a 25-hydroxylation catalyzed by 25-hydroxylase in the liver and then by other enzymes. The mitochondrial sterol 27-hydroxylase catalyzes the first reaction in the oxidation of the side chain of sterol intermediates. The active form of vitamin D3 (calcitriol) binds to intracellular receptors that then function as transcription factors to modulate gene expression. Like the receptors for other steroid hormones and thyroid hormones, the vitamin D receptor has hormone-binding and DNA-binding domains. The vitamin D receptor forms a complex with another intracellular receptor, the retinoid-X receptor, and that heterodimer is what binds to DNA. In most cases studied, the effect is to activate transcription, but situations are also known in which vitamin D suppresses transcription. Calcitriol increases the serum calcium concentrations by (1) increasing GI absorption of phosphorus and calcium, (2) increasing osteoclastic resorption, and (3) increasing distal renal tubular reabsorption of calcium. Calcitriol appears to promote intestinal absorption of calcium through binding to the vitamin D receptor in the mucosal cytoplasm of the intestine. Subsequently, calcium is absorbed through the formation of a calcium-binding protein.|
HMDB0003331::1-Methyladenosine is one of the modified nucleosides, the levels of which are elevated in the urine of patients with malignant tumours. Examination of the expression of 1-methyladenosine is expected to be useful for the histological diagnosis of intraocular tumours (PMID: 8434538  ).|
HMDB0002027::8-Dehydrocholesterol (8-DHC) elevated concentration is one of the diagnostic biochemical hallmarks of classical Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS). Plasma 8-DHC could be only marginally elevated. (PMID: 16435228  ). Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an autosomal recessive condition caused by a defect in cholesterol synthesis (caused by a deficit of 3beta-hydroxysterol-Delta7 reductase). Affected children often have malformations and mental retardation. Autistic behaviors also are evident. In children, the baseline cholesterol, 8-DHC levels, and cholesterol levels following supplementation does not correlate with the presence or severity of autistic symptoms. (PMID: 16761297  ). Accumulation of 8-dehydrocholesterol in Amniotic fluid is diagnostic for SLOS. (PMID 16231320  ).|
HMDB0001993::7a-Hydroxy-cholestene-3-one is a metabolite in bile acid synthesis. It is derived from 7a-hydroxy-cholesterol and can be further metabolized to 7a,12a,-dihydroxy-cholest-4-en-3-one. Analysis of 7a-Hydroxycholestene-3-one (HCO) in serum may serve as a novel, simple, and sensitive method for the detection of bile acid malabsorption in patients with chronic diarrhea of unknown origin (PMID 9952217  ).|
HMDB0002174::Cobalamin participates in two enzymatic processes in mammalian cells. In the methionine synthase (EC 2.1.1.13) reaction, homocysteine (HCys) is converted to methionine allowing for the "recycling" of 5-methyl-tetrahydrofolate (THF) to N5,10 methylene-THF which is needed for the de novo synthesis of thymidylic acid and ultimately, for DNA formation. Since conversion of N5,10-methylene-THF to N5-methyl-THF is irreversible, cobalamin deficiency "traps" folic acid as N5-methyl-THF. Concurrently, HCys accumulates while methionine decreases, leading to a decrease in S-adenosylmethionine which further limits N5,10-methylene-THF formation by decreasing the synthesis of formyl-THF ("formate starvation"). Decreased methionine and S-adenosylmethionine may limit many methylation reactions including those involving DNA and myelin basic protein. In the methylmalonyl CoA mutase (EC 5.1.99.1) reaction, methylmalonyl CoA, derived from propionic acid synthesized by intestinal bacteria, is converted to succinyl CoA, a precursor for fatty acid and heme synthesis Thus, cobalamin deficiency results in methylmalonic acid (MMA) accumulation. Cobalamin deficiency causes megaloblastic anemia and neurocognitive abnormalities but effects on immune function and bone formation have also been described. Low serum cobalamin levels increase the risk of osteoporosis. Tests for cobalamin deficiency include measurements of 1) total cobalamin; 2) MMA and HCys, as indices of functional cobalamin deficiency; and 3) holotranscobalamin as a measure of the metabolically active fraction of circulating cobalamin. Each approach has significant limitations. Moreover, since the pathogenesis of neurologic dysfunction in cobalamin deficiency remains unclear, these tests may not be reliable markers of neurocognitive impairment.| Subtle cobalamin deficiency, defined as elevated metabolite levels usually in asymptomatic patients with low or normal serum cobalamin values, is prevalent in the elderly and has been associated with food cobalamin malabsorption, a disorder characterized by the inability to release vitamin B12 from food or from its binding proteins. Malabsorption is often unrecognized or not investigated. However, because of the potential seriousness of the complications, particularly neuropsychiatric and hematological investigation of all patients who present with vitamin or nutritional deficiency is required. Classic disorders, such as pernicious anemia, are the cause of cobalamin deficiency in only a limited proportion of elderly patients. Epidemiological studies have shown a prevalence of cobalamin deficiency of around 20% in the elderly population of industrialized countries (between 50% and 60%, depending on the definition of cobalamin deficiency used in the study). New routes of cobalamin administration (oral and nasal) are currently being developed, especially the use of oral cobalamin therapy to treat food-cobalamin malabsorption. (PMID: 16814909  , 17822656  ).|
HMDB0041827::Ammonium is an important source of nitrogen for many plant species, especially those growing on hypoxic soils. However, it is also toxic to most crop species and is rarely applied as a sole nitrogen source. The ammonium (more obscurely: aminium) cation is a positively charged polyatomic cation with the chemical formula NH4+. It is formed by the protonation of ammonia (NH3). Ammonium is also a general name for positively charged or protonated substituted amines and quaternary ammonium cations (NR4+), where one or more hydrogen atoms are replaced by organic radical groups (indicated by R). Ammonium is found to be associated with N-acetylglutamate synthetase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0001316::6-Phosphogluconic acid, also known as 6-phospho-D-gluconate or gluconate 6-phosphate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as monosaccharide phosphates. These are monosaccharides comprising a phosphated group linked to the carbohydrate unit. 6-Phosphogluconic acid is soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). 6-Phosphogluconic acid has been found in human adipose tissue, epidermis and prostate tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as saliva and blood. Within the cell, 6-phosphogluconic acid is primarily located in the endoplasmic reticulum. 6-Phosphogluconic acid exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. 6-Phosphogluconic acid participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, 6-Phosphogluconic acid can be biosynthesized from gluconolactone and water through the action of the enzyme 6-phosphogluconolactonase. In addition, 6-Phosphogluconic acid can be converted into D-ribulose 5-phosphate; which is catalyzed by the enzyme putative uncharacterized protein PGD. In humans, 6-phosphogluconic acid is involved in the pentose phosphate pathway. 6-Phosphogluconic acid is also involved in several metabolic disorders, some of which include glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, ribose-5-phosphate isomerase deficiency, transaldolase deficiency, and cancer (via the Warburg effect). Outside of the human body, 6-phosphogluconic acid can be found in a number of food items such as white lupine, american pokeweed, peach, and star anise. This makes 6-phosphogluconic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0000573::Elaidic acid is the major trans fat found in hydrogenated vegetable oils and occurs in small amounts in caprine and bovine milk (very roughly 0.1 % of the fatty acids) [1] and some meats. It is the trans isomer of oleic acid. The name of the elaidinization reaction comes from elaidic acid. Elaidic acid increases CETP activity, which in turn raises VLDL and lowers HDL cholesterol. (Wiki).|
HMDB0000131::Glycerol or glycerin is a colourless, odourless, viscous liquid that is sweet-tasting and mostly non-toxic. It is widely used in the food industry as a sweetener and humectant and in pharmaceutical formulations. Glycerol is an important component of triglycerides (i.e. fats and oils) and of phospholipids. Glycerol is a three-carbon substance that forms the backbone of fatty acids in fats. When the body uses stored fat as a source of energy, glycerol and fatty acids are released into the bloodstream. The glycerol component can be converted into glucose by the liver and provides energy for cellular metabolism. Normally, glycerol shows very little acute toxicity and very high oral doses or acute exposures can be tolerated. On the other hand, chronically high levels of glycerol in the blood are associated with glycerol kinase deficiency (GKD). GKD causes the condition known as hyperglycerolemia, an accumulation of glycerol in the blood and urine. There are three clinically distinct forms of GKD: infantile, juvenile, and adult. The infantile form is the most severe and is associated with vomiting, lethargy, severe developmental delay, and adrenal insufficiency. The mechanisms of glycerol toxicity in infants are not known, but it appears to shift metabolism towards chronic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart, liver, and kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of untreated GKD. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. Patients with the adult form of GKD generally have no symptoms and are often detected fortuitously.|
HMDB0000715::Kynurenic acid (KYNA) is a well-known endogenous antagonist of the glutamate ionotropic excitatory amino acid receptors N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), alphaamino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid and kainate receptors and of the nicotine cholinergic subtype alpha 7 receptors. KYNA neuroprotective and anticonvulsive activities have been demonstrated in animal models of neurodegenerative diseases. Because of KYNA's neuromodulatory character, its involvement has been speculatively linked to the pathogenesis of a number of neurological conditions including those in the ageing process. Different patterns of abnormalities in various stages of KYNA metabolism in the CNS have been reported in Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease. In HIV-1-infected patients and in patients with Lyme neuroborreliosis a marked rise of KYNA metabolism was seen. In the ageing process KYNA metabolism in the CNS of rats shows a characteristic pattern of changes throughout the life span. A marked increase of the KYNA content in the CNS occurs before the birth, followed by a dramatic decline on the day of birth. A low activity was seen during ontogenesis, and a slow and progressive enhancement occurs during maturation and ageing. This remarkable profile of KYNA metabolism alterations in the mammalian brain has been suggested to result from the development of the organisation of neuronal connections and synaptic plasticity, development of receptor recognition sites, maturation and ageing.| There is significant evidence that KYNA (Kynurenic acid) can improve cognition and memory, but it has also been demonstrated that it interferes with working memory. Impairment of cognitive function in various neurodegenerative disorders is accompanied by profound reduction and/or elevation of KYNA metabolism. The view that enhancement of CNS KYNA levels could underlie cognitive decline is supported by the increased KYNA metabolism in Alzheimer's disease, by the increased KYNA metabolism in down's syndrome and the enhancement of KYNA function during the early stage of Huntington's disease. Kynurenic acid is the only endogenous N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist identified up to now, that mediates glutamatergic hypofunction. Schizophrenia is a disorder of dopaminergic neurotransmission, but modulation of the dopaminergic system by glutamatergic neurotransmission seems to play a key role. Despite the NMDA receptor antagonism, kynurenic acid also blocks, in lower doses, the nicotinergic acetycholine receptor, i.e., increased kynurenic acid levels can explain psychotic symptoms and cognitive deterioration. Kynurenic acid levels are described to be higher in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and in critical central nervous system (CNS) regions of schizophrenics as compared to controls. (PMID: 17062375  , 16088227  ).|
HMDB0002003::Lignoceric acid, also tetracosanoic acid, is a normal carboxylic acid, a very long chain fatty acid (VLCFA). Very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) are exclusively oxidized in peroxisomes and their levels are significantly increased in tissues of patients with peroxisomal disorders. (PMID 15565636  ).|
HMDB0000744::Malic acid is a tart-tasting organic dicarboxylic acid that plays a role in many sour or tart foods. In its ionised form it is malate, an intermediate of the TCA cycle along with fumarate. It can also be formed from pyruvate as one of the anaplerotic reactions.|
HMDB0002117::Oleamide is an amide of the fatty acid oleic acid. It is an endogenous substance: it occurs naturally in the body of animals. It accumulates in the cerebrospinal fluid during sleep deprivation and induces sleep in animals. It is being studied as a potential medical treatment for mood and sleep disorders, and cannabinoid-regulated depression. The mechanism of action of oleamide's sleep inducing effects is an area of current research. It is likely that oleamide interacts with multiple neurotransmitter systems. Oleamide is structurally related to the endogenous cannabinoid anandamide, and has the ability to bind to the CB1 receptor as a full agonist.|
HMDB0000207::Oleic acid is an unsaturated fatty acid that is the most widely distributed and abundant fatty acid in nature. It is used commercially in the preparation of oleates and lotions, and as a pharmaceutical solvent (Stedman, 26th ed). Biological source: Major constituent of plant oils e.g. olive oil (about 80%), almond oil (about 80%) and many others, mainly as glyceride. Constituent of tall oil and present in fruits Use/Importance: Food additive. Oleic acid is used in manufacturing of surfactants, soaps, plasticizers. Emulsifying agent in foods and pharmaceuticals. Biological Use/Importance: Skin penetrant. Herbicide, insecticide, fungicide (Dictionary of Organic Compounds). Oleic acid is a fatty acid that occurs naturally in various animal and vegetable fats and oils. It is an odorless, colourless oil, although commercial samples may be yellowish. In chemical terms, oleic acid is classified as a monounsaturated omega-9 fatty acid. It has the formula CH3(CH2)7CH=CH(CH2)7COOH. The term "oleic" means related to, or derived from, oil or olive, the oil that is predominantly composed of oleic acid (Wikipedia). Oleic acid is found to be associated with isovaleric acidemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000220::Palmitic acid, or hexadecanoic acid, is one of the most common saturated fatty acids found in animals, plants, and microorganisms. As its name indicates, it is a major component of the oil from the fruit of oil palms (palm oil). Excess carbohydrates in the body are converted to palmitic acid. Palmitic acid is the first fatty acid produced during fatty acid synthesis and is the precursor to longer fatty acids. As a consequence, palmitic acid is a major body component of animals. In humans, one analysis found it to make up 21–30% (molar) of human depot fat (PMID: 13756126  ), and it is a major, but highly variable, lipid component of human breast milk (PMID: 352132  ). Palmitic acid is used to produce soaps, cosmetics, and industrial mould release agents. These applications use sodium palmitate, which is commonly obtained by saponification of palm oil. To this end, palm oil, rendered from palm tree (species Elaeis guineensis), is treated with sodium hydroxide (in the form of caustic soda or lye), which causes hydrolysis of the ester groups, yielding glycerol and sodium palmitate. Aluminium salts of palmitic acid and naphthenic acid were combined during World War II to produce napalm. The word "napalm" is derived from the words naphthenic acid and palmitic acid (Wikipedia). Palmitic acid is also used in the determination of water hardness and is a surfactant of Levovist, an intravenous ultrasonic contrast agent.|
HMDB0000269::Sphinganine is a blocker postlysosomal cholesterol transport by inhibition of low-density lipoprotein-induced esterification of cholesterol and cause unesterified cholesterol to accumulate in perinuclear vesicles. It has been suggested the possibility that endogenous sphinganine may inhibit cholesterol transport in Niemann-Pick Type C (NPC) disease. (PMID 1817037  ).|
HMDB0000943::Threonic acid is probably derived from glycated proteins or from degradation of ascorbic acid. It is a normal component is aqeous humour and blood (PMID 10420182  ). Threonic acid is a substrate of L-threonate 3-dehydrogenase [EC 1.1.1.129] in ascorbate and aldarate metabolism pathway (KEGG).|
HMDB0000673::Linoleic acid is a doubly unsaturated fatty acid, also known as an omega-6 fatty acid, occurring widely in plant glycosides. In this particular polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA), the first double bond is located between the sixth and seventh carbon atom from the methyl end of the fatty acid (n-6). Linoleic acid is an essential fatty acid in human nutrition because it cannot be synthesized by humans. It is used in the biosynthesis of prostaglandins (via arachidonic acid) and cell membranes (From Stedman, 26th ed). Linoleic acid is found to be associated with isovaleric acidemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000209::Phenyl acetate (or phenylacetate) is a carboxylic acid ester that has been found in the biofluids of patients with nephritis and/or hepatitis as well as patients with phenylketonuria (PKU), an inborn error of metabolism. Excess phenylalanine in the body can be disposed of through a transamination process leading to the production of phenylpyruvate. The phenylpyruvate can be further metabolized into a number of products. Decarboxylation of phenylpyruvate gives phenylacetate, while a reduction reaction gives phenyllactate. The phenylacetate can be further conjugated with glutamine to give phenylacetyl glutamine. All of these metabolites can be detected in serum and urine of PKU patients. Phenyl acetate is also produced endogenously as the metabolite of 2-Phenylethylamine, which is mainly metabolized by monoamine oxidase to form phenyl acetate. 2-phenylethylamine is an "endogenous amphetamine" which may modulate central adrenergic functions, and the urinary phenyl acetate levels have been postulated as a marker for depression. (PMID: 17978765  , 476920  , 6857245  ). Phenylacetate is also found in essential oils, e.g. neroli, rose oil, free and as esters' and in many fruits. As a result it is used as a perfumery and flavoring ingredient.|
HMDB0000806::Myristic acid is a saturated 14-carbon fatty acid occurring in most animal and vegetable fats, particularly butterfat and coconut, palm, and nutmeg oils. It is used to synthesize flavor and as an ingredient in soaps and cosmetics. (From Dorland, 28th ed). Myristic acid is also commonly added to a penultimate nitrogen terminus glycine in receptor-associated kinases to confer the membrane localisation of the enzyme. this is achieved by the myristic acid having a high enough hydrophobicity to become incorporated into the fatty acyl core of the phospholipid bilayer of the plasma membrane of the eukaryotic cell.(wikipedia).|
HMDB0000210::Pantothenic acid, also called vitamin B5, is a water-soluble vitamin required to sustain life. Pantothenic acid is needed to form coenzyme-A (CoA), and is thus critical in the metabolism and synthesis of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. Its name is derived from the Greek pantothen meaning "from everywhere" and small quantities of pantothenic acid are found in nearly every food, with high amounts in whole grain cereals, legumes, eggs, meat, and royal jelly. Pantothenic acid is classified as a member of the secondary alcohols. Secondary alcohols are compounds containing a secondary alcohol functional group, with the general structure HOC(R)(R') (R,R'=alkyl, aryl). Pantothenic acid is considered to be soluble (in water) and acidic. |
HMDB0000946::Ursodeoxycholic acid is an epimer of chenodeoxycholic acid. It is a mammalian bile acid found first in the bear and is apparently either a precursor or a product of chenodeoxycholate. Its administration changes the composition of bile and may dissolve gallstones. It is used as a cholagogue and choleretic. [PubChem]|
HMDB0000660::Fructose, or levulose, is a levorotatory monosaccharide and an isomer of glucose (C6H12O6). The chemical composition of fructose is (C6H12O6). Pure fructose has a sweet taste similar to cane sugar, but with a "fruity" aroma. Although fructose is a hexose (6-carbon sugar), it generally exists as a 5-member hemiketal ring (a furanose). This structure is responsible for the long metabolic pathway and high reactivity compared to glucose. Fructose is found in many foods and is one of the three most important blood sugars along with glucose and galactose. Honey, tree fruits, berries, melons, and some root vegetables, such as beets, sweet potatoes, parsnips, and onions contain fructose, usually in combination with sucrose and glucose. Fructose is also derived from the digestion of sucrose, a disaccharide consisting of glucose and fructose that is broken down by enzymes during digestion. Fructose is the sweetest naturally occurring sugar, estimated to be twice as sweet as sucrose. It is used as a preservative and an intravenous infusion in parenteral feeding. Fructose is a reducing sugar, as are all monosaccharides. The spontaneous addition of single sugar molecules to proteins, known as glycation, is a significant cause of damage in diabetics. Fructose appears to be as dangerous as glucose in this regard, and therefore does not seem to be the answer for diabetes (McPherson et al, 1988). This may be an important contribution to senescence and many age-related chronic diseases (Levi & Werman 1998).|
HMDB0001488::Nicotinic acid, also known as niacin or vitamin B3, is a water-soluble vitamin whose derivatives such as NADH, NAD, NAD+, and NADP play essential roles in energy metabolism in the living cell and DNA repair. The designation vitamin B3 also includes the amide form, nicotinamide or niacinamide. Severe lack of niacin causes the deficiency disease pellagra, whereas a mild deficiency slows down the metabolism decreasing cold tolerance. The recommended daily allowance of niacin is 2-12 mg a day for children, 14 mg a day for women, 16 mg a day for men, and 18 mg a day for pregnant or breast-feeding women. It is found in various animal and plant tissues and has pellagra-curative, vasodilating, and antilipemic properties. The liver can synthesize niacin from the essential amino acid tryptophan (see below), but the synthesis is extremely slow and requires vitamin B6; 60 mg of tryptophan are required to make one milligram of niacin. Bacteria in the gut may also perform the conversion but are inefficient.|
HMDB0000439::2-Furoylglycine is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction:. acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycine. Dietary studies show that 2-Furoylglycine precursors are of exogenous origin. Most probably from furan derivatives found in food prepared by strong heating. This may explain the absence of 2-furoylglycine in urine of breastfed children (PMID 4630229  ).|
HMDB0000494::Stigmastanol, also known as sitostanol or (3b)-stigmastan-3-ol, belongs to stigmastanes and derivatives class of compounds. Those are sterol lipids with a structure based on the stigmastane skeleton, which consists of a cholestane moiety bearing an ethyl group at the carbon atom C24. Stigmastanol is practically insoluble (in water) and an extremely weak acidic compound (based on its pKa). Stigmastanol can be found primarily in blood and feces, as well as in human skeletal muscle tissue. Stigmastanol can be found anywhere throughout the human cell, such as in in the peroxisome, in the cytoplasm, in the Golgi apparatus, and in the membrane (predicted from logP). It can also be found in the extracellular space. Moreover, stigmastanol is found to be associated with sitosterolemia, an inborn error of metabolism. Stigmastanol (sitostanol) is a phytosterol found in a variety of plant sources. Similar to sterol esters and stanol esters, stigmastanol inhibits the absorption of cholesterol from the diet. Animal studies suggest that it also inhibits biosynthesis of cholesterol in the liver (Wikipedia). Stigmastanol is plant stanol. It can decrease the circulating LDL-cholesterol level by reducing intestinal cholesterol absorption (PMID 16910223  ).|
HMDB0000703::It is an isomer of cresotinic acid (2-hydroxy-3-methylbenzoic acid) and oxymethylbenzoic acid (2-methoxybenzoic acid). Derivatives of mandelic acid are formed as a result of metabolism of adrenaline and noradrenaline by monoamine oxidase and catechol-o-methyl transferase. It is also present in certain skin care products, is an intermediate molecule in the production of other biochemicals, may be used as an analytical reagent and is a precursor in the manufacture of dyes. Mandelic acid is an aromatic alpha hydroxy acid with the molecular formula C8H8O3. It is a white crystalline solid that is soluble in water and most common organic solvents. Mandelic acid is found to be associated with phenylketonuria, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000802::Pterin is a chemical compound composed of a pyrazine ring and a pyrimidine ring; the pyrimidine ring has a carbonyl oxygen and an amino group. Several tautomers of pterin exist and are shown below. Pterin belongs to the pteridine family of heterocycles. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0001392::p-Aminobenzoic acid or 4-Aminobenzoic acid, or simply PABA, is an organic compound with molecular formula C7H7NO2. PABA is a white crystalline substance that is only slightly soluble in water. It consists of a benzene ring substituted with an amino group and a carboxylic acid. PABA is an essential nutrient for some bacteria and is sometimes called Vitamin Bx. However, PABA is not essential for humans and it varies in its activity from other B vitamins. PABA is sometimes marketed as an essential nutrient under the premise that it can stimulate intestinal bacteria. Certain bacteria in the human intestinal tract such as E. coli generate PABA from chorismate. Humans lack the enzymes to convert PABA to folate, and therefore require folate from dietary sources such as green leafy vegetables. Although some intestinal bacteria can synthesize folate from PABA and some E. coli can synthesize folate this requires six enzymatic activities in folate synthesis which are not all done in the same bacteria. PABA used to be a common sunscreening agent until found to also be a sensitizer. The potassium salt of PABA is used therapeutically in fibrotic skin disorders.|
HMDB0001492::Gamma-Tocopherol is a collective name for a group of closely related lipids that contain substitutions on the 2H-1-benzopyran-6-ol nucleus and a long hydrocarbon chain of isoprenoid units. They are antioxidants by virtue of the phenolic hydrogen. Tocopherols react with the most reactive form of oxygen and protect unsaturated fatty acids from oxidation.|
HMDB0001859::The excellent tolerability of therapeutic doses of paracetamol (acetaminophen) is a major factor in the very wide use of the drug. The major problem in the use of paracetamol is its hepatotoxicity after an overdose. Hepatotoxicity has also been reported after therapeutic doses, but critical analysis indicates that most patients with alleged toxicity from therapeutic doses have taken overdoses. Importantly, prospective studies indicate that therapeutic doses of paracetamol are an unlikely cause of hepatotoxicity in patients who ingest moderate to large amounts of alcohol (PMID: 15733027  ). Single doses of paracetamol are effective analgesics for acute postoperative pain and give rise to few adverse effects (PMID: 14974073  ). Acetaminophen (AAP) overdose and the resulting hepatotoxicity is an important clinical problem. In addition, AAP is widely used as a prototype hepatotoxin to study mechanisms of chemical-induced cell injury and to test the hepatoprotective potential of new drugs and herbal medicines. Because of its importance, the mechanisms of AAP-induced liver cell injury have been extensively investigated and controversially discussed for many years (PMID: 16863451  ).|
HMDB0003178::Heme is the color-furnishing portion of hemoglobin. It is found free in tissues and as the prosthetic group in many hemeproteins. A heme or haem is a prosthetic group that consists of an iron atom contained in the center of a large heterocyclic organic ring called a porphyrin. Not all porphyrins contain iron, but a substantial fraction of porphyrin-containing metalloproteins have heme as their prosthetic subunit; these are known as hemoproteins.|
HMDB0011718::4-Hydroxybenzaldehyde reacts with NAD+ and H2O to produce 4-hydroxybenzoate, NADH, and 2 protons. The reaction is catalyzed by 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde dehydrogenase. 4-Hydroxybenzaldehyde is found in the benzoate degradation via hydroxylation, bisphenol A degradation, toluene and xylene degradation, and biosynthesis of phenylpropanoids pathways.|
HMDB0012154::3-Dehydrocarnitine is a member of the carnitine family that is an intermediate in carnitine degradation. It can be formed from either D-carnitine or L-carnitine and the enzyme responsible for this oxidation reaction is (S)-carnitine 3-dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.254) or carnitine 3-dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.108), respectively. Carnitine is a quaternary ammonium compound biosynthesized from the amino acids lysine and methionine. In living cells, it is required for the transport of fatty acids from the cytosol into the mitochondria during the breakdown of lipids (or fats) for the generation of metabolic energy.|
HMDB0028689::Alanyl-Histidine is a dipeptide composed of alanine and histidine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028691::Alanyl-Leucine is a dipeptide composed of alanine and leucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0013209::Alanyltryptophan, also known as ala-trp, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as dipeptides. These are organic compounds containing a sequence of exactly two alpha-amino acids joined by a peptide bond. Alanyltryptophan exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Alanyltryptophan has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, urine, and blood. |
HMDB0028878::Histidinyl-Alanine is a dipeptide composed of histidine and alanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028885::Histidinyl-Glycine is a dipeptide composed of histidine and glycine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028892::Histidinyl-Phenylalanine is a dipeptide composed of histidine and phenylalanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028928::Leucyl-Glutamate is a dipeptide composed of leucine and glutamate. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028938::Leucyl-Serine is a dipeptide composed of leucine and serine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028940::Leucyl-Tryptophan is a dipeptide composed of leucine and tryptophan. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029010::Prolyl-Alanine is a dipeptide composed of proline and alanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029083::Tryptophyl-Glycine is a dipeptide composed of tryptophan and glycine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029103::Tyrosyl-Glutamine is a dipeptide composed of tyrosine and glutamine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029123::Valyl-Aspartate is a dipeptide composed of valine and aspartate. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029129::Valyl-Histidine is a dipeptide composed of valine and histidine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0061712::Palmitoyl sphingomyelin is a common form of sphingomyelin. Sphingomyelins are complex membrane lipids composed of phosphorylcholine, sphingosine, and an acylated group, such as a fatty acid. Palmitoyl sphingomyelin is a form of sphingomyelin containing palmitate (16:0) at the variable acylation position. It is the most common form of sphingomyelin found in eggs and is less abundant in the brain and milk. Palmitoyl sphingomyelin interacts with cholesterol in ordered lipid domains (lipid rafts). Sphingomyelinases remove phosphorylcholine from palmitoyl sphingomyelin to produce C-16 ceramide. While ceramides commonly induce apoptosis, ceramides with different fatty acid chain lengths might direct distinct functions and, in some cases, reduce apoptosis. (Reference: https://www.caymanchem.com/app/template/Product.vm/catalog/10007946|
HMDB0061890::Pyroglutamylglycine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as alpha amino acids. These are amino acids in which the amino group is attached to the carbon atom immediately adjacent to the carboxylate group (alpha carbon).|
HMDB0062547::2-Hydroxyacetaminophen sulfate is a member of the class of compounds known as phenylsulfates. Phenylsulfates are compounds containing a sulfuric acid group conjugated to a phenyl group. 2-Hydroxyacetaminophen sulfate is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely strong acidic compound (based on its pKa). 2-Hydroxyacetaminophen sulfate can be found in feces.|
HMDB0000012::2'-Deoxyuridine is a naturally occurring nucleoside. It is similar in chemical structure to uridine, but without the 2'-hydroxyl group. It is considered to be an antimetabolite that is converted to deoxyuridine triphosphate during DNA synthesis. Laboratory suppression of deoxyuridine is used to diagnose megaloblastic anemia due to vitamin B12 and folate deficiencies.|
HMDB0000085::Deoxyguanosine is a nucleoside consisting of the base guanine and the sugar deoxyribose. It is like guanosine, but with one oxygen atom removed. It is a nucleoside component of DNA. Deoxyguanosine can be converted to 8-hydroxy-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) due to hydroxyl radical attack at the C8 of guanine. 8-OHdG is a sensitive marker of the DNA damage This damage, if left unrepaired, has been proposed to contribute to mutagenicity and cancer promotion. Deoxyguanosine is found to be associated with purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000133::Guanosine is a nucleoside comprising guanine attached to a ribose (ribofuranose) ring via a beta-N9-glycosidic bond. Guanosine can be phosphorylated to become GMP (guanosine monophosphate), cGMP (cyclic guanosine monophosphate), GDP (guanosine diphosphate), and GTP (guanosine triphosphate) (Wikipedia). This nucleoside exerts important neuroprotective and neuromodulator roles in the central nervous system, which may be related to inhibition of the glutamatergic neurotransmission activity. Guanosine is the specific extracellular guanine-based purines effector and its conversion occurs not only in the central nervous system but also peripherally (PMID: 16325434  ). Guanosine is found to be associated with purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000256::Squalene is a natural raw material found in human sebum (5%) and in shark-liver oil. An unsaturated aliphatic hydrocarbon (carotenoid) with six unconjugated double bonds. (Hawley's Condensed Chemical Reference) Biological Source: Found in fish liver oils, yeast lipids and many vegetable oils, e.g. palm oil, cottonseed oil, rapeseed oil. Volatile component of scent material from Saguinus oedipus (cotton-top tamarin monkey) and Saguinus fuscicollis (saddle-back tamarin monkey). Component of adult human sebum principally responsible for the fixing of fingerprints (ChemNetBase) Squalene is a natural organic compound originally obtained for commercial purposes primarily from shark liver oil, though there are botanical sources as well, including rice bran, wheat germ, and olives. All higher organisms produce squalene, including humans. It is a hydrocarbon and a triterpene. -- Wikipedia; Squalene is the biochemical precursor to the whole family of steroids. Oxidation of one of the terminal double bonds of squalene yields 2,3-squalene oxide which undergoes enzyme-catalyzed cyclization to afford lanosterol, which is then elaborated into cholesterol and other steroids. -- Wikipedia; Squalene is a low density compound often stored in the bodies of cartilaginous fishes such as sharks, which lack a swim bladder and must therefore reduce their body density with fats and oils. Squalene, which is stored mainly in the shark's liver, is lighter than water with a specific gravity of 0.855. -- Wikipedia Uses: Bactericide. Intermediate in the manufacture of pharmaceuticals, rubber chemicals and coloring materials (Physical Constants of Chemical Substances).|
HMDB0000423::3,4-Dihydroxyhydrocinnamic acid (or Dihydrocaffeic acid, DHCA) is a metabolite product of the hydrogenation of caffeoylquinic acids, occurring in normal human biofluids, with potent antioxidant properties. DHCA has been detected in human plasma following coffee ingestion (PMID 15607645  ), and is increased with some dietary sources, such as after ingestion of phenolic constituents of artichoke leaf extract. (PMID 15693705  ) Polyphenol-rich foods such as vegetables and fruits have been shown to significantly improve platelet function in ex vivo studies in humans. (PMID 16038718  ) Its antioxidant activity has been tested to reduce ferric iron in the ferric reducing antioxidant power (FRAP) assay, and it has been suggested that its catechol structure convey the antioxidant effect in plasma and in erythrocytes. (PMID 11768243  ).|
HMDB0000719::Homoserine is a more reactive variant of the amino acid serine. In this variant, the hydroxyl side chain contains an additional CH2 group which brings the hydroxyl group closer to its own carboxyl group, allowing it to chemically react to form a five-membered ring. This occurs at the point that amino acids normally join to their neighbours in a peptide bond. Homoserine is therefore unsuitable for forming proteins and has been eliminated from the repertoire of amino acids used by living things. Homoserine is the final product on the C-terminal end of the N-terminal fragment following a cyanogen bromide cleavage. (wikipedia).|
HMDB0000852::beta-Sitosterol, a main dietary phytosterol found in plants, may have the potential for prevention and therapy for human cancer. Phytosterols are plant sterols found in foods such as oils, nuts, and vegetables. Phytosterols, in the same way as cholesterol, contain a double bond and are susceptible to oxidation, and are characterized by anti-carcinogenic and anti-atherogenic properties (PMID: 13129445  , 11432711  ). beta-Sitosterol is a phytopharmacological extract containing a mixture of phytosterols, with smaller amounts of other sterols, bonded with glucosides. These phytosterols are commonly derived from the South African star grass, Hypoxis rooperi, or from species of Pinus and Picea. The purported active constituent is termed beta-sitosterol. Additionally, the quantity of beta-sitosterol-beta-D-glucoside is often reported. Although the exact mechanism of action of beta-sitosterols is unknown, it may be related to cholesterol metabolism or anti-inflammatory effects (via interference with prostaglandin metabolism). Compared with placebo, beta-sitosterol improved urinary symptom scores and flow measures (PMID: 10368239  ). A plant food-based diet modifies the serum beta-sitosterol concentration in hyperandrogenic postmenopausal women. This finding indicates that beta-sitosterol can be used as a biomarker of exposure in observational studies or as a compliance indicator in dietary intervention studies of cancer prevention (PMID: 14652381  ). beta-Sitosterol induces apoptosis and activates key caspases in MDA-MB-231 human breast cancer cells (PMID: 12579296  ).|
HMDB0000872::Tetradecanedioic acid, also known as 1,14-tetradecanedioate or NSC 9504, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as long-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 13 and 21 carbon atoms. Tetradecanedioic acid is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Tetradecanedioic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, blood, and urine. Within the cell, tetradecanedioic acid is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP), cytoplasm and adiposome. Tetradecanedioic acid is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, tetradecane, tetradecanedioyl-CoA, and (3S)-hydroxytetradecanedioyl-CoA. |
HMDB0000897::7-Methylguanine is a metabolite of DNA methylation and depurination observed in normal human biofluids; however, it has been found significantly higher in the urine of smokers than in nonsmokers. (PMID 16059882  ).|
HMDB0001015::Effective in the initiation of protein synthesis. The initiating methionine residue enters the ribosome as N-formylmethionyl tRNA. This process occurs in Escherichia coli and other bacteria as well as in the mitochondria of eukaryotic cells.|
HMDB0001138::N-acetylglutamic acid is an acetylated amino acid. N-Acetylglutamic acid (abbreviated NAcGlu) is biosynthesized from glutamic acid and acetyl-CoA by the enzyme N-acetylglutamate synthase (NAGS). NAcGlu activates carbamoyl phosphate synthetase in the urea cycle. A deficiency in N-Acetyl Glutamate Synthase or a genetic mutation in the gene coding for the enzyme, will lead to urea cycle failure in which ammonia is not converted to urea, but rather accumulated in blood leading to the condition called Type I Hyperammonemia. This is a severe neonatal disorder with fatal consequences, if not detected immediately upon birth.|
HMDB0001251::Lanosterol is a tetracyclic triterpenoid which is the compound from which all steroids are derived. Lanosterol is biochemically synthesized starting from acetyl-CoA by the HMG-CoA reductase pathway. The critical step is the enzymatic conversion of the acyclic terpene squalene to the polycylic lanosterol via 2,3-squalene oxide.(wikipedia).|
HMDB0001325::N6,N6,N6-Trimethyl-L-lysine is a methylated derivative of the amino acid lysine. It is a component of histone proteins, a precursor of carnitine and a coenzyme of fatty acid oxidation. N6,N6,N6-Trimethyl-L-lysine residues are found in a number of proteins and are generated by the action of S-adenosyl-L-methionine on exposed lysine residues. When trimethyllysine is released from cognate proteins via proteolysis, it serves as a precursor for carnitine biosynthesis. Mitochondrial 6-N-trimethyllysine dioxygenase converts 6-N-trimethyllysine to 3-hydroxy-6-N-trimethyllysine as the first step for carnitine biosynthesis. Because the subsequent carnitine biosynthesis enzymes are cytosolic, 3-hydroxy-6-N-trimethyllysine must be transported out of the mitochondria by a putative mitochondrial 6-N-trimethyllysine/3-hydroxy-6-N-trimethyllysine transporter system. Plasma -N-trimethyllysine concentrations are significantly lower in systemic carnitine deficiency patients compared to normal individuals, but no significant difference in urinary -N-trimethyllysine excretion is seen between the two groups.|
HMDB0002000::Myristoleic acid is a monounsaturated fatty acid that represent approximately 0.3 - 0.7% of the total fatty acid composition of adipose tissue triacylglycerol in human. (PMID 10393134  ). It has been suggested that his cytotoxic and effective cell death inducer activity could be used for the treatment of prostate cancer. (PMID 11304730  ).|
HMDB0002994::Erythritol occurs widely in nature and has been found to occur naturally in several foods including wine, sake, beer, watermelon, pear, grape, and soy sauce. Evidence indicates that erythritol also exists endogenously in the tissues and body fluids of humans and animals. Erythritol is absorbed from the proximal intestine by passive diffusion in a manner similar to that of many low molecular weight organic molecules which do not have associated active transport systems. The rate of absorption is related to their molecular size; erythritol, a 4-carbon molecule, passes through the intestinal membranes at a faster rate than larger molecules such as mannitol or glucose. In diabetics, erythritol has also been shown to be rapidly absorbed and excreted unchanged in the urine. Following absorption, ingested erythritol is rapidly distributed throughout the body and has been reported to occur in hepatocytes, pancreatic cells, and vascular smooth muscle cells. Erythritol also has been reported to cross the human placenta and to pass slowly from the plasma into the brain and cerebrospinal fluid (PMID: 9862657  , Food and Chemical Toxicology (1998), 36(12), 1139-1174.). Erythritol is found to be associated with ribose-5-phosphate isomerase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0003072::Quinic acid is a sugar acid. It is also a cyclitol, a cyclic polyol. More specifically, quinic acid is a crystalline acid obtained from cinchona bark, coffee beans, tobacco leaves, carrot leaves, apples, peaches, pears, plums, vegetables etc. Quinic acid can also be made synthetically by hydrolysis of chlorogenic acid. Quinic acid is implicated in the perceived acidity of coffee.|
HMDB0003229::Palmitoleic acid, or 9-hexadecenoic acid, is an unsaturated fatty acid that is a common constituent of the glycerides of human adipose tissue. Present in all tissues, generally found in higher concentrations in the liver. Macadamia oil (Macadamia integrifolia) and Sea Buckthorn oil (Hippophae rhamnoides) are botanical sources of palmitoleic acid, containing 22 and 40% respectively (Wikipedia). Palmitoleic acid is found to be associated with isovaleric acidemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0004041::Allothreonine is the substrate of the enzyme Serine hydroxymethyltransferase1 (SHMT, EC 2.1.2.1), a human cytoplasmic mRNA binding protein. SHMT uses pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP) and tetrahydropteroylglutamate (H4PteGlu) as coenzymes and catalyzes the reversible interconversion of serine and glycine. In addition to these physiological reactions, SHMT also catalyzes, in the absence of H4PteGlu, the retroaldol cleavage of several 3-hydroxyamino acids, such as allothreonine. Allothreonine is a plant metabolite that appears in the human diet in variable concentrations depending on: plant species, physiological changes during plant growth, senescence, and reactions to environmental stress or to changes due to plant transformation. (PMID: 10858298  , 10952545  ).|
HMDB0004284::Tyrosol is a phenolic compound present in two of the traditional components of the Mediterranean diet: wine and virgin olive oil. The presence of tyrosol has been described in red and white wines. Tyrosol is also present in vermouth and beer. Tyrosol has been shown to be able to exert antioxidant activity in vitro studies. Oxidation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) appears to occur predominantly in arterial intimae in microdomains sequestered from antioxidants of plasma. The antioxidant content of the LDL particle is critical for its protection. The ability of tyrosol to bind human LDL has been reported. The bioavailability of tyrosol in humans from virgin olive oil in its natural form has been demonstrated. Urinary tyrosol increases, reaching a peak at 0-4 h after virgin olive oil administration. Men and women show a different pattern of urinary excretion of tyrosol. Moreover, tyrosol is absorbed in a dose-dependent manner after sustained and moderate doses of virgin olive oil. Tyrosol from wine or virgin olive oil could exert beneficial effects on human health in vivo if its biological properties are confirmed. (PMID 15134375  ).|
HMDB0029224::N-Methylphenylalanine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenylalanine and derivatives. Phenylalanine and derivatives are compounds containing phenylalanine or a derivative thereof resulting from reaction of phenylalanine at the amino group or the carboxy group, or from the replacement of any hydrogen of glycine by a heteroatom. N-Methylphenylalanine is slightly soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). N-Methylphenylalanine has been primarily detected in feces. |
HMDB0031068::Isopalmitic acid, also known as isopalmitate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as long-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 13 and 21 carbon atoms. Isopalmitic acid exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Isopalmitic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, isopalmitic acid is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP), cytoplasm and adiposome. Isopalmitic acid can be biosynthesized from pentadecanoic acid. Outside of the human body, isopalmitic acid can be found in milk and milk products. This makes isopalmitic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product.|
HMDB0061883::Caproic acid, also known as hexanoate or caproate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as medium-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 4 and 12 carbon atoms. Caproic acid exists as a liquid, slightly soluble (in water), and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Caproic acid has been detected in most biofluids, including cerebrospinal fluid, feces, sweat, and urine. Within the cell, caproic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and adiposome. Caproic acid exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. In humans, caproic acid is involved in fatty acid biosynthesis pathway and the Beta oxidation OF very long chain fatty acids pathway. Caproic acid is also involved in a couple of metabolic disorders, which include the mitochondrial Beta-oxidation OF short chain saturated fatty acids pathway and short-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (schad). Outside of the human body, caproic acid can be found in a number of food items such as sweet basil, wild carrot, agar, and wax gourd. This makes caproic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. Caproic acid is a potentially toxic compound. Caproic acid has been linked to several inborn metabolic disorders including celiac disease and medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.|
HMDB0061914::8-hydroxy caprylic acid, also known as Omega-hydroxyoctanoic acid or Omega-hydroxycaprylate, is classified as a medium-chain hydroxy acids or a derivative. A medium-chain hydroxy acids or a derivative are hydroxy acids with a 6 to 12 carbon atoms long side chain. 8-hydroxy caprylic acid is considered a slightly soluble (in water), acidic compound. 8-hydroxy caprylic acid can be synthesized from octanoic acid. 8-hydroxy caprylic acid can be synthesized into oscr#14 and mono(7-carboxyheptyl) phthalate.  8-hydroxy caprylic acid is a Fatty Acid lipid molecule.|
HMDB0000092::Dimethylglycine (DMG) is an amino acid derivative found in the cells of all plants and animals and can be obtained in the diet in small amounts from grains and meat. The human body produces DMG when metabolizing choline into Glycine. Dimethylglycine that is not metabolized in the liver is transported by the circulatory system to body tissue. Dimethylglycine was popular with Russian athletes and cosmonauts owing to its reputed ability to increase endurance and reduce fatigue. DMG is also a byproduct of homocysteine metabolism. Homocysteine and betaine are converted to methionine and N, N-dimethylglycine by betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase. Dimethylglycine in the urine is a biomarker for the consumption of legumes.|
HMDB0000002::1,3-Diaminopropane is a stable, flammable and highly hydroscopic fluid. It is a polyamine that is normally quite toxic if swallowed, inhaled or absorbed through the skin. It is a catabolic byproduct of spermidine. It is also a precursor in the enzymatic synthesis of beta-alanine. 1, 3-Diaminopropane is involved in the arginine/proline metabolic pathways and the beta-alanine metabolic pathway.|
HMDB0000017::4-Pyridoxic acid is the catabolic product of vitamin B6 (also known as pyridoxine, pyridoxal and pyradoxamine) which is excreted in the urine. Urinary levels of 4-pyridoxic acid are lower in females than in males and will be reduced in persons with riboflavin deficiency. 4-Pyridoxic acid is formed by the action of aldehyde oxidase I (an endogenous enzyme) and by microbial enzymes (pyridoxal 4-dehydrogenase), an NAD-dependent aldehyde dehydrogenase. 4-pyridoxic acid can be further broken down by the gut microflora via 4-pyridoxic acid dehydrogenase. This enzyme catalyzes the four electron oxidation of 4-pyridoxic acid to 3-hydroxy-2-methylpyridine-4,5-dicarboxylate, using nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide as a cofactor.|
HMDB0000019::alpha-Ketoisovaleric acid is an abnormal metabolite that arises from the incomplete breakdown of branched-chain amino acids. alpha-Ketoisovaleric acid is a neurotoxin, an acidogen, and a metabotoxin. A neurotoxin causes damage to nerve cells and nerve tissues. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of alpha-ketoisovaleric acid are associated with maple syrup urine disease.| MSUD is a metabolic disorder caused by a deficiency of the branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase complex (BCKDC), leading to a buildup of the branched-chain amino acids (leucine, isoleucine, and valine) and their toxic by-products (ketoacids) in the blood and urine. The symptoms of MSUD often show in infancy and lead to severe brain damage if untreated. MSUD may also present later depending on the severity of the disease. If left untreated in older individuals, during times of metabolic crisis, symptoms of the condition include uncharacteristically inappropriate, extreme, or erratic behaviour and moods, hallucinations, anorexia, weight loss, anemia, diarrhea, vomiting, dehydration, lethargy, oscillating hypertonia and hypotonia, ataxia, seizures, hypoglycemia, ketoacidosis, opisthotonus, pancreatitis, rapid neurological decline, and coma.  In maple syrup urine disease, the brain concentration of branched-chain ketoacids can increase 10- to 20-fold. This leads to a depletion of glutamate and a consequent reduction in the concentration of brain glutamine, aspartate, alanine, and other amino acids. The result is a compromise of energy metabolism because of a failure of the malate-aspartate shuttle and a diminished rate of protein synthesis (PMID: 15930465  ).| alpha-Ketoisovaleric acid is a keto-acid, which is a subclass of organic acids. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart, liver, and kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of untreated MSUD. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development.|
HMDB0000020::P-hydroxyphenylacetic acid, also known as 4-Hydroxybenzeneacetate or Parahydroxy phenylacetate, is classified as a member of the 1-hydroxy-2-unsubstituted benzenoids. 1-hydroxy-2-unsubstituted benzenoids are phenols that a unsubstituted at the 2-position. P-hydroxyphenylacetic acid is considered to be slightly soluble (in water) and acidic.  P-hydroxyphenylacetic acid can be synthesized from acetic acid. It is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, methyl 2-(4-hydroxyphenyl)acetate, ixerochinolide, and lactucopicrin 15-oxalate.  P-hydroxyphenylacetic acid can be found throughout numerous foods such as Olives, Cocoa beans, Oats, and Mushrooms. P-hydroxyphenylacetic acid can be found throughout all human tissues; and in all biofluids. Within a cell, P-hydroxyphenylacetic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and in the extracellular space|
HMDB0000026::Ureidopropionic acid is an intermediate in the metabolism of uracil. More specifically it is a breakdown product of dihydrouracil and is produced by the enzyme dihydropyrimidase. It is further decomposed to beta-alanine via the enzyme beta-ureidopropionase. Ureidopropionic acid is essentially a urea derivative of beta-alanine. High levels of Ureidopropionic acid are found in individuals with beta-ureidopropionase (UP) deficiency [PMID: 11675655  ]. Enzyme deficiencies in pyrimidine metabolism are associated with a risk for severe toxicity against the antineoplastic agent 5-fluorouracil.|
HMDB0000038::Dihydrobiopterin (BH2) is an oxidation product of tetrahydrobiopterin. Tetrahydrobiopterin is a natural occurring cofactor of the aromatic amino acid hydroxylase and is involved in the synthesis of tyrosine and the neurotransmitters dopamine and serotonin. Tetrahydrobiopterin is also essential for nitric oxide synthase catalyzed oxidation of L-arginine to L-citrulline and nitric oxide.|
HMDB0000071::Deoxyinosine is a nucleoside that is formed when hypoxanthine is attached to a deoxyribose ring (also known as a ribofuranose) via a beta-N9-glycosidic bond. Deoxyinosine is found in DNA while inosine is found in RNA. Inosine is a nucleic acid important for RNA editing. Adenosine deaminase (ADA) catalyzes the conversion of adenosine and deoxyadenosine to inosine and deoxyinosine, respectively. ADA-deficient individuals suffer from severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) and are unable to produce significant numbers of mature T or B lymphocytes. This occurs as a consequence of the accumulation of ADA substrates or their metabolites. Inosine is also an intermediate in a chain of purine nucleotides reactions required for muscle movements. Moreover, deoxyinosine is found to be associated with purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000139::Glyceric acid is a colourless syrupy acid, obtained from oxidation of glycerol. It is a compound that is secreted excessively in the urine by patients suffering from D-glyceric aciduria, an inborn error of metabolism, and D-glycerate anemia. Deficiency of human glycerate kinase leads to D-glycerate acidemia/D-glyceric aciduria. Symptoms of the disease include progressive neurological impairment, hypotonia, seizures, failure to thrive, and metabolic acidosis. At sufficiently high levels, glyceric acid can act as an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Glyceric acid is an organic acid. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of untreated glyceric aciduria. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures.|
HMDB0000143::D-Galactose is an aldohexose that occurs naturally in the D-form in lactose, cerebrosides, gangliosides, and mucoproteins. D-Galactose is an energy-providing nutrient and also a necessary basic substrate for the biosynthesis of many macromolecules in the body. Metabolic pathways for D-Galactose are important not only for the provision of these pathways but also for the prevention of D-Galactose and D-Galactose metabolite accumulation. The main source of D-Galactose is lactose in the milk of mammals, but it can also be found in some fruits and vegetables. Utilization of D-Galactose in all living cells is initiated by the phosphorylation of the hexose by the enzyme galactokinase (E.C. 2.7.1.6) (GALK) to form D-Galactose-1-phosphate. In the presence of D-Galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (E.C. 2.7.7.12) (GALT) D-Galactose-1-phosphate is exchanged with glucose-1-phosphate in UDP-glucose to form UDP-galactose. Glucose-1-phosphate will then enter the glycolytic pathway for energy production. Deficiency of the enzyme GALT in galactosemic patients leads to the accumulation of D-Galactose-1-phosphate. Classic galactosemia-a term that denotes the presence of D-Galactose in the blood is the rare inborn error of D-Galactose metabolism, diagnosed by the deficiency of the second enzyme of the D-Galactose assimilation pathway, GALT, which, in turn, is caused by mutations at the GALT gene. (PMID: 15256214  , 11020650  , 10408771  ). Galactose in the urine is a biomarker for the consumption of milk.|
HMDB0000152::Gentisic acid is a dihydroxybenzoic acid. It is a crystalline powder that forms monoclinic prism in water solution. Gentisic acid is an active metabolite of salicylic acid degradation. There is an increasing amount of evidence indicating that gentisic acid has a broad spectrum of biological activity, such as anti-inflammatory, antirheumatic and antioxidant properties. Gentisic acid is also a byproduct of tyrosine and benzoate metabolism.|
HMDB0000163::Maltose, or malt sugar, is a primary disaccharide in the human diet formed from two units of glucose joined with an alpha (1->4) linkage. It is the second member of an important biochemical series of glucose chains. The addition of another glucose unit yields maltotriose, Further additions will produce dextrins, also called maltodextrins, and eventually starch. Maltose can be broken down into two glucose molecules by hydrolysis in living organisms. At the surface of the small intestine, the brush border enzymes maltase, breaks down maltose. (PMID: 14522745  ).|
HMDB0000169::D-Mannose is a carbohydrate. High-mannose-type oligosaccharides have been shown to play important roles in protein quality control. Several intracellular proteins, such as lectins, chaperones and glycan-processing enzymes, are involved in this process. These include calnexin/calreticulin, UDP-glucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase (UGGT), cargo receptors (such as VIP36 and ERGIC-53), mannosidase-like proteins (e.g. EDEM and Htm1p) and ubiquitin ligase (Fbs). They are thought to recognize high-mannose-type glycans with subtly different structures. Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) is an important constituent of the innate immune system. This protein binds through multiple lectin domains to the repeating sugar arrays that decorate many microbial surfaces, and is then able to activate the complement system through a specific protease called MBL-associated protease-2. The primary pathway for the formation of L-fucose in procaryotic and eucaryotic cells is from D-mannose via an internal oxidation reduction and then epimerization of GDP-D-mannose to produce GDP-L-fucose. (PMID: 9488699  , 16154739  , 11414367  ).|
HMDB0000174::Fucose is a hexose deoxy sugar with the chemical formula C6H12O5. L-fucose (6-deoxy-L-galactose) is a monosaccharide that is a common component of many N- and O-linked glycans and glycolipids produced by mammalian cells. It is the fundamental sub-unit of the fucoidan polysaccharide. As a free sugar, L-fucose is normally found at very low levels in mammals. It is unique in that it is the only levorotatory sugar synthesized and utilized by mammals. Fucose polymers are synthesized by fucosyltransferases.  All fucosyltransferases utilize a nucleotide-activated form of fucose, GDP-fucose, as a fucose donor in the construction of fucosylated oligosaccharides. The ABO blood group antigens are among the most well known fucosylated glycans. The alpha-1->3 linked core fucose is a suspected carbohydrate antigen for IgE-mediated allergy. Two structural features distinguish fucose from other six-carbon sugars present in mammals: the lack of a hydroxyl group on the carbon at the 6-position (C-6) and the L-configuration. In fucose-containing glycan structures, fucosylated glycans, fucose can exist as a terminal modification or serve as an attachment point for adding other sugars. Fucose is metabolized by an enzyme called alpha-fucosidase. Fucose is secreted in urine when the liver is damaged.  Free L-fucose in serum and urine can be used as a marker for cancer, cirrhosis, alcoholic liver disease and gastric ulcers (PMID: 2311216  ) (PMID: 8488966  ). Elevated levels of serum fucose have been reported in breast cancer, ovarian cancer, lung cancer, liver cancer, diabetes and cardiovascular disease. It has been shown that feeding rats a diet high in L-fucose induces neuropathy similar to that seen in diabetics|
HMDB0000206::N-acetyl-lysine is an acetylated amino acid. Post-translational lysine-acetylation is one of two major modifications of lysine residues in various proteins. Acetylation of specific lysine residues in the N-terminal domains of core histones is a biochemical marker of active genes. Acetylation is now known to play a major role in eukaryotic transcription. Specifically, acetyltransferase enzymes that act on particular lysine side chains of histones and other proteins are intimately involved in transcriptional activation. By modifying chromatin proteins and transcription-related factors, these acetylases are believed to regulate the transcription of many genes. The best-characterized mechanism is acetylation, catalyzed by histone acetyltransferase (HAT) enzymes. HATs function enzymatically by transferring an acetyl group from acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) to the -amino group of certain lysine side chains within a histone's basic N-terminal tail region. Within a histone octamer, these regions extend out from the associated globular domains, and in the context of a nucleosome, they are believed to bind the DNA through charge interactions (positively charged histone tails associated with negatively charged DNA) or mediate interactions between nucleosomes. Lysine acetylation, which neutralizes part of a tail region's positive charge, is postulated to weaken histone-DNA or nucleosome-nucleosome interactions and/or signal a conformational change, thereby destabilizing nucleosome structure or arrangement and giving other nuclear factors, such as the transcription complex, more access to a genetic locus. In agreement with this is the fact that acetylated chromatin has long been associated with states of transcriptional activation. Specific recognition of N-acetyl-lysine is a conserved function of all bromodomains found in different proteins, recognized as an emerging intracellular signaling mechanism that plays critical roles in regulating gene transcription, cell-cycle progression, apoptosis, DNA repair, and cytoskeletal organization. (PMID 9169194  , 10827952  , 17340003  , 16247734  , 9478947  , 10839822  ).|
HMDB0000212::Acetylgalactosamine is an important constituent of brain heteropolysaccharides (glycoproteins). The concentration of the N-acetylgalactosamine-containing glycoproteins in the 3-year-old cerebral gray matter from human brain is 7-15 times greater than in 8-year old tissue and 15-30 times greater than in 72-year-old tissue. (PMID 1207868  ). Acetylgalactosamine patterns of the composition of the soluble glycoproteins from endoscopic mucosal biopsies tends to decrease in the tumor area in cancer of the stomach (compared with the antrum and corpus of control stomachs). (PMID: 7151277  ). Chondroitin 6-sulfotransferase (C6ST) is the key enzyme in the biosynthesis of chondroitin 6-sulfate, a glycosaminoglycan implicated in chondrogenesis, neoplasia, atherosclerosis, and other processes. C6ST catalyzes the transfer of sulfate from 3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate to carbon 6 of the N- Acetylgalactosamine residues of chondroitin. (PMID: 9639683  ).|
HMDB0000213::Myo-inositol 1-phosphate is a metabolite of the Inositol phosphate metabolism and the Phosphatidylinositol signaling system. Inositol phosphatases [EC:3.1.3.25] play a crucial role in the phosphatidylinositol signaling pathway; in brain, the expression is substantially higher in the subcortical regions, most prominently in the caudate. The phosphatidylinositol pathway is thought to be modified by lithium, a commonly prescribed medication in treating bipolar disorder. (OMIM 605922  ).|
HMDB0000215::N-Acetyl-D-Glucosamine (N-acetlyglucosamine) is a monosaccharide derivative of glucose. Chemically it is an amide between glucosamine and acetic acid. A single N-acetlyglucosamine moiety linked to serine or threonine residues on nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins -O-GlcNAc, is an ubiquitous post-translational protein modification. O-GlcNAc modified proteins are involved in sensing the nutrient status of the surrounding cellular environment and adjusting the activity of cellular proteins accordingly. O-GlcNAc regulates cellular responses to hormones such as insulin, initiates a protective response to stress, modulates a cell's capacity to grow and divide, and regulates gene transcription. In humans, it exists in skin, cartilage and blood vessel as a component of hyaluronic acid, and bone tissue, cornea and aorta as a component of keratan sulfate. (PMID 16237703  ).|
HMDB0000230::N-acetylneuraminic acid (NeuAc) or sialic acid is an acetyl derivative of the amino sugar neuraminic acid. It occurs in many glycoproteins, glycolipids, and polysaccharides in both mammals and bacteria. The most abundant sialic acid, NeuAc, is synthesized in vivo from N-acetylated D-mannosamine (ManNAc) or D-glucosamine (GlcNAc). NeuAc and its activated form, CMP-NeuAc, are biosynthesized in five consecutive reactions: UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) N-acetylmannosamine (ManNAc) ManNAc 6-phosphate NeuAc 9-phosphate NeuAc CMP-NeuAc. CMP-NeuAc is transported into the Golgi apparatus and, with the aid of specific sialyltransferases, added onto nonreducing positions on oligosaccharide chains of glycoproteins and glycolipids. NeuAc is widely distributed throughout human tissues and found in several fluids, including serum, cerebrospinal fluid, saliva, urine, amniotic fluid, and breast milk. It is found in high levels in the brain, adrenal glands, and the heart. Serum and urine levels of the free acid are elevated in individuals suffering from renal failure. Serum and saliva Neu5Ac levels are also elevated in alcoholics. A genetic disorder known as Salla disease or infantile NeuAc storage disease is also characterized by high serum and urine levels of this compound. The negative charge of is responsible for the slippery feel of saliva and mucins coating the body's organs. This particular sialic acid is known to act as a "decoy" for invading pathogens. Along with involvement in preventing infections (mucus associated with mucous membranes — mouth, nose, GI, respiratory tract), Neu5Ac acts as a receptor for influenza viruses, allowing attachment to mucous cells via hemagglutinin (an early step in acquiring influenzavirus infection).| NeuAc (N-acetylneuraminic acid) is also becoming known as an agent necessary for mediating ganglioside distribution and structures in the brain. Sialic acid (SA) is an N-acetylated derivative of neuraminic acid that is an abundant terminal monosaccharide of glycoconjugates. Normal human serum SA is largely bound to glycoproteins or glycolipids (Total sialic acid, TSA, 1.5-2.5 mmol/L), with small amounts of free SA (1-3 umol/L). Negatively charged SA units stabilize glycoprotein conformation in cell surface receptors to increase cell rigidity. This enables signal recognition and adhesion to ligands, antibodies, enzymes and microbes. SA residues are antigenic determinant residues in carbohydrate chains of glycolipids and glycoproteins, chemical messengers in tissue and body fluids, and may regulate glomeruli basement membrane permeability. Sialic acids are structurally unique nine-carbon keto sugars occupying the interface between the host and commensal or pathogenic microorganisms. An important function of host sialic acid is to regulate innate immunity. Sialic acid is the moiety most actively recycled for metabolic purposes in the salvage pathways in glycosphingolipid metabolism. Sialic acid is indispensable for the neuritogenic activities of gangliosides constituents which are unique in that a sialic acid directly binds to the glucose of the cerebroside, they are mutually connected in tandem, and some are located in the internal parts of the sugar chain. Sialylation (sialic acid linked to galactose, N-acetylgalactosamine, or linked to another sialic acid) represents one of the most frequently occurring terminations of the oligosaccharide chains of glycoproteins and glycolipids. The biosynthesis of the various linkages is mediated by the different members of the sialyltransferase family (PMID: 11425186   , 11287396   , 12770781   , 16624269   , 12510390   , 15007099   ).|
HMDB0000252::Sphingosine is a 18-carbon amino alcohol with a long unsaturated hydrocarbon chain. Sphingosine and its derivative sphinganine are the major bases of the sphingolipids in mammals. (Dorland, 28th ed.). Sphingosine can be phosphorylated in vivo via two kinases, sphingosine kinase type 1 and sphingosine kinase type 2. This leads to the formation of sphingosine-1-phosphate, a potent signaling lipid.(Wikipedia).|
HMDB0000283::D-Ribose, commonly referred to as simply ribose, is a five-carbon sugar found in all living cells. Ribose is not an essential nutrient because it can be synthesized by almost every tissue in the body from other substances, such as glucose. It is vital for life as a component of DNA, RNA, ATP, ADP, and AMP. In nature, small amounts of ribose can be found in ripe fruits and vegetables. Brewer's yeast, which has a high concentration of RNA, is another rich source of ribose.| D-ribose is also a component of many so-called energy drinks and anti-ageing products available on the market today. Ribose is a structural component of ATP, which is the primary energy source for exercising muscle. The adenosine component is an adenine base attached to the five-carbon sugar ribose. ATP provides energy to working muscles by releasing a phosphate group, hence becoming ADP, which in turn may release a phosphate group, then becoming AMP. During intense muscular activity, the total amount of ATP available is quickly depleted. In an effort to correct this imbalance, AMP is broken down in the muscle and secreted from the cell. Once the breakdown products of AMP are released from the cell, the energy potential (TAN pool) of the muscle is reduced and ATP must then be reformed using ribose. Ribose helps restore the level of adenine nucleotides by bypassing the rate-limiting step in the de novo (oxidative pentose phosphate) pathway, which regenerates phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate (PRPP), the essential precursor for ATP. If ribose is not readily available to a cell, glucose may be converted to ribose. Ribose supplementation has been shown to increase the rate of ATP resynthesis following intense exercise. The use of ribose in men with severe coronary artery disease resulted in improved exercise tolerance. Hence, there is interest in the potential of ribose supplements to boost muscular performance in athletic activities (PMID: 17618002  , Curr Sports Med Rep. 2007 Jul;6(4):254-7.).|
HMDB0000301::Urocanic acid is a breakdown (deamination) product of histidine. In the liver, urocanic acid is an intermediate in the conversion of histidine to glutamic acid, whereas in the epidermis, it accumulates and may be both a UV protectant and an immunoregulator. Urocanic acid (UA) exists as a trans isomer (t-UA, approximately 30 mg/cm2) in the uppermost layer of the skin (stratum corneum). t-UA is formed as the cells of the second layer of skin become metabolically inactive. During this process, proteins and membranes degrade, histidine is released, and histidase (histidine ammonia lyase) catalyzes the deamination of histidine to form t-UA. t-UA accumulates in the epidermis until removal by either the monthly skin renewal cycle or sweat. Upon absorption of UV light, the naturally occurring t-UA isomerizes to its cis form, c-UA. Because DNA lesions (e.g., pyrimidine dimers) in the lower epidermis can result from UV-B absorption, initial research proposed that t-UA acted as a natural sunscreen absorbing UV-B in the stratum corneum before the damaging rays could penetrate into lower epidermal zones. Researchers have found that c-UA also suppresses contact hypersensitivity and delayed hypersensitivity, reduces the Langerhans cell count in the epidermis, prolongs skin-graft survival time, and affects natural killer cell activity.|
HMDB0000303::Tryptamine is a monoamine compound that is common precursor molecule to many hormones and neurotransmitters. Biosynthesis generally proceeds from the amino acid tryptophan, with tryptamine in turn acting as a precursor for other compounds. Substitutions to the tryptamine molecule give rise to a group of compounds collectively known as tryptamines. The most well-known tryptamines are serotonin, an important neurotransmitter, and melatonin, a hormone involved in regulating the sleep-wake cycle.|
HMDB0000317::2-Hydroxy-3-methylpentanoic acid or 2-hydroxy-3-methylvaleric acid (HMVA) is an organic acid generated by L-isoleucine metabolism. It is derived from the reduction of 2-Keto-3-methylvaleric acid (KMVA), possibly through the action of a lactate dehydrogenase (PMID: 1429566  ). There are 4 stereoisomers of HMVA (2S,3S-HMVA, 2R,3R-HMVA, 2S,3R-HMVA and 2R,3S-HMVA), of which the 2S,3S and 2S,3R derivatives are generally separable. HMVA is found in the urine and blood of normal individuals but in very elevated levels in patients with maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) (PMID: 1429566  ). Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) is an inherited metabolic disease predominantly characterized by neurological dysfunction including psychomotor/delay/mental retardation.|
HMDB0000325::3-Hydroxysuberic acid is a metabolite derived from the w-oxidation of 3-hydroxy fatty acids and the subsequent beta-oxidation of longer-chain 3-hydroxy dicarboxylic acids (PMID 2001377  ). It has been found increased in ketoaciduria (PMID 1591279  ).|
HMDB0000365::Epiandrosterone is a naturally occurring steroid synthesized in the adrenal cortex, gonads, brain, and gastrointestinal tract. It is less active than androsterone and excreted in small amounts in normal human urine. Epiandrosterone is a metabolite of the most abundant adrenal androgenic steroid dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) in young adult humans, but is not completely inactive and is considered an effector as well. Epiandrosterone is a precursor or substrate for cytochrome P450 species and enzymes (EC 1.14.13.100, 25-hydroxycholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase) that produce 7alpha- and 7beta-hydroxylated metabolites in the human brain and other organs. These 7-hydroxylated derivatives exert anti-glucocorticoid and neuroprotective effects (PMID: 17017935  , 12475725  , 15650074  , 15784286  ).|
HMDB0000375::3-(3-Hydroxyphenyl)propanoic (hMPP) acid is one of the major metabolites of ingested caffeic acid (PMID 15479001  ) and of the phenolic degradation products of proanthocyanidins (the most abundant polyphenol present in chocolate) by the microflora in the colon (PMID 12663291  ). mHPP is suspected to have antioxidants properties and is actively absorbed by the monocarboxylic acid transporter (MCT) in intestinal Caco-2 cell monolayers (PMID 15479001  , 12663291  ).|
HMDB0000391::7-Ketodeoxycholic acid is a bile acid. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ).|
HMDB0000400::3,7-Dihydroxy-12-oxocholanoic acid is a bile acid. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ).|
HMDB0000407::2-Hydroxy-3-methylbutyric acid (also known as 2-hydroxyisovaleric acid) is a metabolite found in the urine of patients with phenylketonuria (PMID: 7978272  ), methylmalonic acidemia, propionic acidemia, 3-ketothiolase deficiency, isovaleric acidemia, 3-methylcrotonylglycemia, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric acidemia, multiple carboxylase deficiency, glutaric aciduria, ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency, glyceroluria, tyrosinemia type I, galactosemia, and maple syrup urine disease (PMID: 11048741  ). 2-Hydroxyisovaleric acid has also been identified in the urine of patients with lactic acidosis and ketoacidosis (PMID: 884872  ), and in the urine of severely asphyxiated babies (PMID: 1610944  ). 2-Hydroxyisovaleric acid originates mainly from ketogenesis and from the metabolism of valine, leucine, and isoleucine (PMID: 6434570  ).|
HMDB0000415::3a,6b,7b-Trihydroxy-5b-cholanoic acid is a bile acid found in urine exhibiting a complex modification pattern, including free, glyco- and sulfoconjugated forms (PMID 3834660  ). A bile acid. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ).|
HMDB0000417::3D,7D,11D-Phytanic acid is an isomer of Phytanic acid, an unusual 20-carbon branched-chain fatty acid; Phytanic acid accumulates in blood and tissues of patients with Refsum disease (RD, an inborn error of lipid metabolism inherited as an autosomal recessive trait (OMIM 266500  )), and is a reliable identifier of RD from a large number of other neurological disorders. Phytanic acid also accumulates in a number of other disorders with a very different clinical course: disorders of peroxisome biogenesis (Zellweger syndrome (OMIM 214100  ), neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (OMIM 202370  ), infantile Refsum disease (OMIM 266510  )) and rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata, type 1 (OMIM 215100  ). Phytanic acid is a 3-methyl fatty acid that cannot be beta-oxidized directly, and first undergoes an alpha-oxidation a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase, which is deficient in RD, the only true disorder of phytanic acid alpha-oxidation. (The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease).|
HMDB0000440::3-Hydroxyphenylacetic acid is a rutin metabolite and an antioxidant. It has a protective biological activity in human. It is a substrate of enzyme 4-hydroxyphenylacetate 3-monooxygenase [EC 1.14.13.3] in the pathway tyrosine metabolism (KEGG, PMID 155437  ). 3-Hydroxyphenylacetic acid is found to be associated with phenylketonuria, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000446::N-Alpha-acetyllysine is a N-acetylated amino acid. It is a normal constituent of human urine with concentrations in normal samples too small to allow its routine detection; however, it has been found at increased levels in the urine of a patient with aminoacylase I deficiency. (PMID 16274666  ).|
HMDB0000451::cis-4-Hydroxycyclohexylacetic acid is a tyrosine metabolite that has been found in the urine of a patient with a defect of 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase (or HPPD) (EC 1.13.11.27), an inborn error of metabolism (PMIDs 701419, 719903) also called hawkinsinuria. 4-Hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase participates in the tyrosine catabolic pathway by catalyzing the conversion of 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate to homogentisate (Hager et al., 1957). The mechanism of action of 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase involves a decarboxylation step and an oxidation step, followed by a rearrangement step to form homogentisic acid (Tomoeda et al., 2000). Awata et al. (1994) determined that the HPD gene contains 14 exons. Analysis of the 5-prime flanking sequence of the gene suggested that expression of the gene is regulated by hepatocyte-specific and liver-enriched transcription factors, as well as by hormones (OMIM: 609695  ).|
HMDB0000467::Nutriacholic acid is a bile acid. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ).|
HMDB0000482::Caprylic acid is the common name for the eight-carbon straight-chain fatty acid known by the systematic name octanoic acid. It is found naturally in coconuts and breast milk. It is an oily liquid with a slightly unpleasant rancid taste that is minimally soluble in water. Caprylic acid is used commercially in the production of esters used in perfumery and also in the manufacture of dyes (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0000491::3-Methyl-2-oxovaleric acid is an abnormal metabolite that arises from the incomplete breakdown of branched-chain amino acids. 3-Methyl-2-oxovaleric acid is a neurotoxin, an acidogen, and a metabotoxin. A neurotoxin causes damage to nerve cells and nerve tissues. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of 3-methyl-2-oxovaleric acid are associated with maple syrup urine disease. MSUD is a metabolic disorder caused by a deficiency of the branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase complex (BCKDC), leading to a buildup of the branched-chain amino acids (leucine, isoleucine, and valine) and their toxic by-products (ketoacids) in the blood and urine. The symptoms of MSUD often show in infancy and lead to severe brain damage if untreated. MSUD may also present later depending on the severity of the disease. If left untreated in older individuals, during times of metabolic crisis, symptoms of the condition include uncharacteristically inappropriate, extreme, or erratic behaviour and moods, hallucinations, anorexia, weight loss, anemia, diarrhea, vomiting, dehydration, lethargy, oscillating hypertonia and hypotonia, ataxia, seizures, hypoglycemia, ketoacidosis, opisthotonus, pancreatitis, rapid neurological decline, and coma.| In maple syrup urine disease, the brain concentration of branched-chain ketoacids can increase 10- to 20-fold. This leads to a depletion of glutamate and a consequent reduction in the concentration of brain glutamine, aspartate, alanine, and other amino acids. The result is a compromise of energy metabolism because of a failure of the malate-aspartate shuttle and a diminished rate of protein synthesis (PMID: 15930465  ). 3-Methyl-2-oxovaleric acid is a keto-acid, which is a subclass of organic acids. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart, liver, and kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of untreated MSUD. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development.|
HMDB0000502::3-Oxocholic acid, also known as 7alpha,12alpha-dihydroxy-3-oxo-5beta-cholan-24-oic acid, is a bile acid. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in the bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depending only on the presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. 3-Oxocholic acid is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and acidic.|
HMDB0000511::Capric acid is a member of the series of fatty acids found in oils and animal fats. The names of caproic, caprylic, and capric acids are all derived from the word caper (Latin for goat). These fatty acids are light yellowish transparent oily liquids with uncomfortable smells. They are used in organic synthesis, perfume manufacturing, medicine, lubricating grease, rubber, and dye (Chemicalland21).|
HMDB0000512::Acetylphenylalanine is a hazardous amphipathic metabolite of phenylalanine. It appears in large amount in urine of patients with phenylketonuria which is a human genetic disorder due to the lack of phenylalanine hydroxylase, the enzyme necessary to metabolize phenylalanine to tyrosine. Acetylphenylalanine is a product of enzyme phenylalanine N-acetyltransferase [EC 2.3.1.53] in the pathway phenylalanine metabolism. (KEGG; Wikipedia).|
HMDB0000525::5-Hydroxyhexanoic acid is a normal dicarboxylic acid degradation product of fatty acids; however, it has been found in patients with non-ketotic dicarboxylic aciduria and one patient on a diet containing excessive amounts of medium-chain triglycerides. Increased amounts of dicarboxylic acids are excreted in human urine under conditions of medium-chain triglyceride (MCT) feeding, abnormal fatty acid oxidation (FAO) and fasting. Criteria to distinguish dicarboxylic aciduria originating from MCT feeding and other conditions are needed in urinary organic acid profiling for detecting inborn errors of metabolism. Medium-chain triglycerides (MCTs) are absorbed and metabolized differently from long-chain triglycerides (LCTs). MCTs may be useful as a dietary substitute in a variety of clinical disorders. Urinary excretion of 5-hydroxyhexanoic acid, the (omega-1) hydroxylation product, was increased during MCT feeding as compared with LCT feeding in patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (PMID: 6897376  , 2239769  , 8596483  ). Moreover, 5-hydroxyhexanoic acid is also found to be associated with Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MCADD), which is also an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000539::Arabinonic acid, also known as arabate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as sugar acids and derivatives. Sugar acids and derivatives are compounds containing a saccharide unit which bears a carboxylic acid group. Arabinonic acid is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Arabinonic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, arabinonic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Arabinonic acid can be converted into D-arabinono-1,4-lactone and 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-D-arabinonic acid. |
HMDB0000553::3L,7D,11D-Phytanic acid is an isomer of Phytanic acid, an unusual 20-carbon branched-chain fatty acid; Phytanic acid accumulates in blood and tissues of patients with Refsum disease (RD, an inborn error of lipid metabolism inherited as an autosomal recessive trait (OMIM 266500  )), and is a reliably identifier of RD from a large number of other neurological disorders. Phytanic acid also accumulates in a number of other disorders with a very different clinical course: disorders of peroxisome biogenesis (Zellweger syndrome (OMIM 214100  ), neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (OMIM 202370  ), infantile Refsum disease (OMIM 266510  )) and rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata, type 1 (OMIM 215100  ). Phytanic acid is a 3-methyl fatty acid that cannot be beta-oxidized directly, and first undergoes an alpha-oxidation a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase, which is deficient in RD, the only true disorder of phytanic acid alpha-oxidation. (The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease).|
HMDB0000557::L-alloisoleucine is a branched chain amino acid and is a stereo-isomer of L-isoleucine. It is a common constituent of human plasma (albeit at low levels). L-alloisoleucine is produced as a byproduct of isoleucine transamination. L-Isoleucine is one of the four common amino acids (the 3 others being threonine, hydroxyproline, and hydroxylysine) that have two asymmetric carbon atoms which produce four structural possibilities for the same chemical composition. L-alloisoleucine differs from L-isoleucine by having having different stereochemistry around its beta carbon. Plasma L-alloisoleucine, which is derived from L-isoleucine in vivo, can be used for the diagnosis of maple syrup urine disease (MSUD), a genetic disorder. Indeed, plasma L-alloisoleucine levels above 5 umol/L is the most specific and most sensitive diagnostic marker for all forms of MSUD (PMID: 10508118  ). In MSUD the degradation of the essential branched-chain L-amino acids leucine, valine, and isoleucine and their derived 2-oxoacids is impaired because of an inherited deficiency in branched-chain 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase complex (EC 1.2.4.4) activity. The accumulation of branched-chain compounds in blood and other body fluids can exert neurotoxic effects.|
HMDB0000577::Coprosterol or coprostanol is a cholesterol derivative found in human feces, gallstones, eggs, and other biological matter. Coprosterol is the odorous principle of feces. It is formed from the biohydrogenation of cholesterol (cholest-5en-3β-ol) in the gut of most higher animals and birds. This compound has frequently been used as a biomarker for the presence of human faecal matter in the environment. American physician Austin Flint named it stercorin (Wikipedia). The transformation of cholesterol into coprosterol in its passage through the body involves a reduction of the C5:C6 double bond, and a transition from the allocholanic- to the cholanic-ring system. Although it is established that the bacterial flora of the intestine is concerned in the reduction process, the mechanism by which the stereochemical change is brought about is unknown. Current data suggests that cholestenone and coprostanone, and not cholesterol itself, are the immediate precursors of coprosterol which is formed from them in the intestine by bacterial reduction.|
HMDB0000594::gamma-Glutamylphenylalanine is a dipeptide composed of gamma-glutamate and phenylalanine, and is a proteolytic breakdown product of larger proteins. It is probably formed by transpeptidation between glutathione and the corresponding amino acid, catalyzed by gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (PMID: 237763   ). gamma-Glutamylphenylalanine belongs to the family of N-acyl-alpha amino acids and derivatives. These are compounds containing an alpha amino acid which bears an acyl group at its terminal nitrogen atom. gamma-Glutamylphenylalanine is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. It can be detected in the urine of patients with phenylketonuria, which is a human genetic disorder due to the lack of phenylalanine hydroxylase to metabolize phenylalanine to tyrosine (Wikipedia). gamma-Glutamylphenylalanine is found in adzuki bean, onion (Allium cepa), garlic (Allium sativum), and soybean.|
HMDB0000613::Erythronic acid is a sugar component of aqueous humour (eye). It may be derived from glycated proteins or from degradation of ascorbic acid. Erythronic acid is a normal organic acid present in a healthy adult and pediatric population. It has been found in urine, plasma, CSF, and synovial fluid (PMID: 14708889  , 8087979  , 8376520  , 10420182  ). Erythronic acid is formed when N-acetyl-D-glucosamine (GlcNAc) is oxidized. GlcNAc is a constituent of hyaluronic acid (HA), a polysaccharide consisting of alternating units of glucuronic acid and GlcNAc, present as an aqueous solution in synovial fluid. In the synovial fluid of patients suffering from rheumatoid arthritis, HA is thought to be degraded either by radicals generated by Fenton chemistry (Fe2+/H2O2) or by NaOCl generated by myeloperoxidase (PMID: 10614067  ).|
HMDB0000621::Ribulose is a ketopentose - a monosaccharide containing five carbon atoms, and including a ketone functional group. D-ribulose is an intermediate in the fungal pathway for D-arabitol production. As the 1,5-bisphosphate, it combines with CO2 at the start of the photosynthetic process in green plants (carbon dioxide trap); d-ribulose is the epimer of d-xylulose. (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0000625::Gluconic acid occurs naturally in fruit, honey and wine and is used as a food additive, an acidity regulator. It is also used in cleaning products where it helps cleaning up mineral deposits. It is a strong chelating agent, especially in alkaline solution. It chelates the anions of calcium, iron, aluminium, copper, and other heavy metals. Glucono delta lactone is a cyclic ester of D-gluconic acid.|
HMDB0000626::Deoxycholic acid is a secondary bile acid produced in the liver and is usually conjugated with glycine or taurine. It facilitates fat absorption and cholesterol excretion. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in the bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, and depends only on the presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine, and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH, and consequently require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients.| Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g. membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ). When present in sufficiently high levels, deoxycholic acid can act as a hepatotoxin, a metabotoxin, and an oncometabolite. A hepatotoxin causes damage to the liver or liver cells. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. An oncometabolite is a compound, when present at chronically high levels, that promotes tumour growth and survival.| Among the primary bile acids, cholic acid is considered to be the least hepatotoxic while deoxycholic acid is the most hepatoxic (PMID: 1641875  ). The liver toxicity of bile acids appears to be due to their ability to peroxidate lipids and to lyse liver cells. High bile acid levels lead to the generation of reactive oxygen species and reactive nitrogen species, disruption of the cell membrane and mitochondria, induction of DNA damage, mutation and apoptosis, and the development of reduced apoptosis capability upon chronic exposure (PMID: 24884764  ). Chronically high levels of deoxycholic acid are associated with familial hypercholanemia. In hypercholanemia, bile acids, including deoxycholic acid, are elevated in the blood. This disease causes liver damage, extensive itching, poor fat absorption, and can lead to rickets due to lack of calcium in bones. The deficiency of normal bile acids in the intestines results in a deficiency of vitamin K, which also adversely affects clotting of the blood. The bile acid ursodiol (ursodeoxycholic acid) can improve symptoms associated with familial hypercholanemia. Chronically high levels of deoxycholic acid are also associated with several forms of cancer including colon cancer, pancreatic cancer, esophageal cancer, and many other GI cancers.|
HMDB0000631::Deoxycholic acid glycine conjugate, or Deoxygcholylglycine, is an acyl glycine and a bile acid-glycine conjugate. It is a secondary bile acid produced by the action of enzymes existing in the microbial flora of the colonic environment. In hepatocytes, both primary and secondary bile acids undergo amino acid conjugation at the C-24 carboxylic acid on the side chain, and almost all bile acids in the bile duct therefore exist in a glycine conjugated form (PMID:16949895  ). As a bile salt it acts as a detergent to solubilize fats for absorption and is itself absorbed. It is used as a cholagogue and choleretic.|
HMDB0000638::Lauric acid, or dodecanoic acid is the main fatty acid in coconut oil and in palm kernel oil, and is believed to have antimicrobial properties. It is a white, powdery solid with a faint odor of bay oil. Lauric acid, although slightly irritating to mucous membranes, has a very low toxicity and so is used in many soaps and shampoos.|
HMDB0000650::D-alpha-Aminobutyric acid is the D-isomer of alpha-aminobutyric acid. The L-form of this amino acid is used in the biosynthesis of ophthalmic acid (a tripeptide analogue of glutathione in which the cysteine group is replaced by L-2-aminobutyrate, which was first discovered and isolated from calf lens). The D-form of this amino acid is a substrate for D-amino acid oxidase. There is little evidence that the D-form of this amino acid is found in human biofluids or tissues. What little does exist is likely of bacterial origin.|
HMDB0000671::Indolelactic acid is a tryptophan metabolite found in human plasma and serum and normal urine. Tryptophan is metabolized by two major pathways in humans, either through kynurenine or via a series of indoles, and some of its metabolites are known to be biologically active. Indolelactic acid is present in various amounts, significantly higher in umbilical foetal plasma than in maternal plasma in the protein-bound form. (PMID 2361979  , 1400722  , 3597614  , 11060358  , 1400722  ).|
HMDB0000672::Thapsic acid, also known as thapsate or hexadecanedioate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as long-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 13 and 21 carbon atoms. Thapsic acid exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Thapsic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, thapsic acid is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP), cytoplasm and adiposome. Thapsic acid is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, (3S)-hydroxyhexadecanedioyl-CoA, hexadecanedioyl-CoA, and (3R)-hydroxyhexadecanedioyl-CoA. Outside of the human body, thapsic acid can be found in potato and sweet cherry. This makes thapsic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0000691::Malonic acid (IUPAC systematic name: propanedioic acid) is a dicarboxylic acid with structure CH2(COOH)2. The ionised form of malonic acid, as well as its esters and salts, are known as malonates. For example, diethyl malonate is malonic acid's ethyl ester. The name originates from Latin malum, meaning apple. Malonic acid is the archetypal example of a competitive inhibitor: it acts against succinate dehydrogenase (complex II) in the respiratory electron transport chain. Malonic acid is found to be associated with malonyl-CoA decarboxylase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000706::This is a metabolic byproduct of aspartame (Nutrasweet). Aspartame is the methyl ester of aspartylphenylalanine. After hydrolysis of the ester bond in the intestinal lumen, the dipeptide is apparently absorbed and digested in the same manner as dipeptides derived from protein digestion. There are several Asp-Phe dipeptidases that degrade this peptide. It has been suggested that individuals with aspartame allergies may be defficient in this peptidase. (PMID 3743970  ). It has been observed that the N-beta-L-aspartyl-L-phenylalanine (a breakdown product of Asn-Phe) is a naturally occurring peptide found in both blood and urine.(PMID: 2723819  ).|
HMDB0000710::4-Hydroxybutyric acid (also known as gamma-hydroxybutyrate or GHB) is a precursor and a metabolite of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). GHB acts as a central nervous system (CNS) neuromodulator, mediating its effects through GABA and GHB-specific receptors, or by affecting dopamine transmission (PMID: 16620539  ). GHB occurs naturally in all mammals, but its function remains unknown. GHB is labeled as an illegal drug in most countries, but it also is used as a legal drug (Xyrem) in patients with narcolepsy. It is used illegally (under the street names juice, liquid ecstasy, or G) as an intoxicant for increasing athletic performance and as a date rape drug. In high doses, GHB inhibits the CNS, inducing sleep and inhibiting the respiratory drive. In lower doses, its euphoriant effect predominates (PMID: 17658710  ). When present in sufficiently high levels, 4-hydroxybutyric acid can act as an acidogen, a neurotoxin, and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A neurotoxin is a compound that adversely affects neural cells and tissues. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of 4-hydroxybutyric acid are associated with two inborn errors of metabolism: glutaric aciduria II and succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency (SSADH). SSADH deficiency leads to a 30-fold increase of GHB and a 2-4 fold increase of GABA in the brains of patients with SSADH deficiency as compared to normal brain concentrations of the compounds.| As an acidogen, 4-hydroxybutyric acid is an organic acid, and abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart abnormalities, kidney abnormalities, liver damage, seizures, coma, and possibly death. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. These are also the characteristic symptoms of the untreated IEMs mentioned above. Particularly for SSADH deficiency, the most common features observed include developmental delay, hypotonia, and intellectual disability. Nearly half of patients exhibit ataxia, seizures, behaviour problems, and hyporeflexia. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures. As a neurotoxin, GHB appears to affect both GABA (a neurotransmitter) signaling and glutamate signaling (another neurotransmitter). Glutamine metabolism may also play a role in the pathophysiology of excessive levels of GHB. High levels of GHB have been shown to depress both the NMDA and AMPA/kainite receptor-mediated functions and may also alter glutamatergic excitatory synaptic transmission as well.|
HMDB0000711::2-Hydroxy caprylic acid, also known as a-hydroxyoctanoate or alpha-hydroxyoctanoic acid, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as medium-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 4 and 12 carbon atoms. 2-Hydroxy caprylic acid exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 2-Hydroxy caprylic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, saliva, and urine. Within the cell, 2-hydroxy caprylic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and adiposome. 2-Hydroxy caprylic acid participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, 2-hydroxy caprylic acid can be biosynthesized from octanoic acid. 2-Hydroxy caprylic acid can also be converted into 2-hydroxyoctanoyl-CoA. |
HMDB0000729::Alpha-Hydroxyisobutyric acid is a metabolite of methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE). MTBE may be obtained through environmental exposure. MTBE is rapidly eliminated from the body, mainly through expired air as the unchanged compound. MTBE is to some extent metabolised to t-butyl alcohol (TBA) and formaldehyde and oxidised to 2-methyl-1,2-propanediol and a-hydroxy isobuturic acid. Alpha-Hydroxyisobutyric acid has been used as an arial bactericide.|
HMDB0000746::Hydroxyisocaproic acid is an end product of leucine metabolism in human tissues such as muscle and connective tissue. It belongs to 2-hydroxycarboxylic acid group of amino acid metabolites (PMID 6434570   ). Hydroxyisocaproic acid functions as an “anti-catabolite” and is widely used in the body building community. Chronic alpha-hydroxyisocaproic acid treatment of rats has been shown to improve muscle recovery after immobilization-induced atrophy (PMID: 23757407  ). Additionally, a 4-week hydroxyisocaproic acid supplementation of 1.5 g a day was shown to lead to increases in muscle mass during an intensive training period among soccer athletes (PMID: 20051111  ). Hydroxyisocaproic acid has also shown some potential as a topical antibiotic (PMID: 22483561  ). Elevated levels of 2-hydroxyisocaproic acid have been found in the urine of patients with dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase (E3) deficiency (PMID: 6688766  ). Hydroxyisocaproic acid is also elevated in maple syrup urine disease, a genetic disorder, and has been shown to accelerate lipid peroxidation. It may also be an indicator of oxidative stress (PMID: 11894849  ).|
HMDB0000755::Hydroxyphenyllactic acid or 4-hydroxyphenyllactate (the L-form) is a tyrosine metabolite. The level of L-hydroxyphenyllactic acid is elevated in patients with a deficiency of the enzyme p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate oxidase (EC 1.14.2.2) (PMID: 4720815  ). L-hydroxyphenyllactate is present in relatively higher concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid and urine of patients with phenylketonuria (PKU) and tyrosinemia (PMID: 3126358  ). However, the D-form of hydroxyphenyllactate is of bacterial origin and is also found in individuals with bacterial overgrowth or unusual gut microflora (PMID: 3126358  ).  Microbial hydroxyphenyllactate is likely derived from phenolic or polyphenolic compounds in the diet.  Bifidobacteria and lactobacilli produce considerable amounts of phenyllactic and p-hydroxyphenyllactic acids (PMID: 23061754  ).  It has also been shown that hydroxyphenyllactate decreases ROS (reactive oxygen species) production in both mitochondria and neutrophils and so hydroxyphenyllactate may function as a natural anti-oxidant (PMID: 23061754  ).|
HMDB0000759::Glycyl-l-leucine is a dipeptide that appears to be a common substrate for glycyl-leucine dipeptidase. It belongs to the family of Peptides. These are compounds containing an amide derived from two or more amino carboxylic acid molecules (the same or different) by formation of a covalent bond from the carbonyl carbon of one to the nitrogen atom of another.|
HMDB0000764::Hydrocinnamic acid, also known as phenylpropanoate or dihydrocinnamate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenylpropanoic acids. Phenylpropanoic acids are compounds with a structure containing a benzene ring conjugated to a propanoic acid. Hydrocinnamic acid exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Hydrocinnamic acid has been found in human liver and kidney tissues, and has also been primarily detected in saliva, feces, urine, and blood. Within the cell, hydrocinnamic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Hydrocinnamic acid participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, hydrocinnamic acid can be biosynthesized from propionic acid. Hydrocinnamic acid is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, 3-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)propanoic acid, 3-phenylpropionate ester, and 3-hydroxy-3-phenylpropionic acid. Hydrocinnamic acid is a sweet, balsamic, and cinnamon tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as sourdock, common wheat, cashew nut, and nuts. This makes hydrocinnamic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0000766::N-Acetyl-L-alanine is a substrate for Guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(I)/G(S)/G(O) gamma-2 subunit, Myelin basic protein, GTP-binding nuclear protein Ran, Tropomyosin alpha 4 chain, HIV-1 Rev binding protein 2, Xaa-Pro dipeptidase, Thymosin beta-10, Actin-like protein 3, Alanine aminotransferase, Serine/threonine protein phosphatase PP1-beta catalytic subunit, 10 kDa heat shock protein (mitochondrial), Calmodulin and Beta-1-syntrophin.|
HMDB0000772::Nonadecanoic acid is an odd-numbered long chain fatty acid, likely derived from bacterial or plant sources. Nonadecanoic acid has been found in ox fats and vegetable oils. It is also used by certain insects as a phermone.|
HMDB0000779::Phenyllactic acid a product of phenylalanine catabolism, appearing prominently in the urine in individuals with phenylketonuria. Levels of several phenylalanine metabolites, including phenylacetate (PAA), phenyllactate (PLA), and phenylpyruvate (PPA)) are elevated in Phenylketonuria (PKU) (OMIM 261600  ). Phenyllactic acid is likely produced from phenylpyruvate via the action of lactate dehydrogenase. The D-form of this organic acid is typically derived from bacterial sources while the L-form is almost certainly endogenous. Levels of phenyllactate are normally very low in blood or urine. High levels of PLA in the urine or blood are often indicative of phenylketonuria (PKU) and hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA). PKU is due to lack of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), so that phenylalanine is converted not to tyrosine but to phenylpyruvic acid (a precursor of phenylactate). In particular, excessive phenylalanine is typically metabolized into phenylketones through, a transaminase pathway route involving glutamate. Metabolites of this transamination reaction include phenylacetate, phenylpyruvate and phenethylamine. In persons with PKU, dietary phenylalanine either accumulates in the body or some of it is converted to phenylpyruvic acid and then to phenyllactate through the action of lactate dehydrogenase. Individuals with PKU tend to excrete large quantities of phenylpyruvate, phenylacetate and phenyllactate, along with phenylalanine, in their urine. If untreated, mental retardation effects and microcephaly are evident by the first year along with other symptoms which include: unusual irritability, epileptic seizures and skin lesions. Hyperactivity, EEG abnormalities and seizures, and severe learning disabilities are major clinical problems later in life. A "musty or mousy" odor of skin, hair, sweat and urine (due to phenylacetate accumulation); and a tendency to hypopigmentation and eczema are also observed.| The neural-development effects of PKU (phenylketonuria) are primarily due to the disruption of neurotransmitter synthesis. In particular, phenylalanine is a large, neutral amino acid which moves across the blood-brain barrier (BBB) via the large neutral amino acid transporter (LNAAT). Excessive phenylalanine in the blood saturates the transporter. Thus, excessive levels of phenylalanine significantly decrease the levels of other LNAAs in the brain. But since these amino acids are required for protein and neurotransmitter synthesis, phenylalanine accumulation disrupts brain development, leading to mental retardation. PMID: 10790306  ; OMIM: 261600  .|
HMDB0000784::Azelaic acid (AZA) is a naturally occurring saturated nine-carbon dicarboxylic acid (COOH (CH2)7-COOH). It possesses a variety of biological actions both in vitro and in vivo. Interest in the biological activity of AZA arose originally out of studies of skin surface lipids and the pathogenesis of hypochromia in pityriasis versicolor infection. Later, it was shown that Pityrosporum can oxidize unsaturated fatty acids to C8-C12 dicarboxylic acids that are cornpetitive inhibitors of tyrosinase in vitro. Azelaic acid was chosen for further investigation and development of a new topical drug for treating hyperpigmentary disorders for the following reasons: it possesses a middle-range of antityrosinase activity, is inexpensive, and more soluble to be incorporated into a base cream than other dicarboxylic acids. Azelaic acid is another option for the topical treatment of mild to moderate inflammatory acne vulgaris. It offers effectiveness similar to that of other agents without the systemic side effects of oral antibiotics or the allergic sensitization of topical benzoyl peroxide and with less irritation than tretinoin. Azelaic acid is less expensive than certain other prescription acne preparations, but it is much more expensive than nonprescription benzoyl peroxide preparations. Whether it is safe and effective when used in combination with other agents is not known. (PMID: 7737781  , 8961845  ).|
HMDB0000808::N-Butyrylglycine is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism, such as ethylmalonic encephalopathy. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13), which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction: acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycine amino acids composed of glycine substituted at the nitrogen rather than the usual carbon position, resulting in the loss of hydrogen bonding donors. Polymers of these compounds are called Peptoids.|
HMDB0000826::Pentadecanoic acid is a fatty acid of exogenous (primarily ruminant) origin. Many "odd" length long chain amino acids are derived from the consumption of dairy fats (milk and meat). Pentadecanoic acid constitutes 1.05% of milk fat and 0.43% of ruminant meat fat. The content of heptadecanoic acid in the subcutaneous adipose tissue of humans appears to be a good biological marker of long-term milk fat intake in free-living individuals in populations with high consumption of dairy products. (PMID 9701185  ; PMID 11238766  ).|
HMDB0000827::Stearic acid, also called octadecanoic acid, is one of the useful types of saturated fatty acids that comes from many animal and vegetable fats and oils. It is a waxy solid, and its chemical formula is CH3(CH2)16COOH. Its name comes from the Greek word stear, which means tallow. Its IUPAC name is octadecanoic acid. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0000847::Pelargonic acid, or nonanoic acid, is a fatty acid which occurs naturally as esters is the oil of pelargonium. Synthetic esters, such as methyl nonanoate, are used as flavorings. Pelargonic acid is an organic compound composed of a nine-carbon chain terminating in a carboxylic acid. It is an oily liquid with an unpleasant, rancid odor. It is nearly insoluble in water, but well soluble in chloroform and ether. The derivative 4-nonanoylmorpholine is an ingredient in some pepper sprays.|
HMDB0000849::Rhamnose (Rham) is a naturally occurring deoxy sugar. It can be classified as either a methyl-pentose or a 6-deoxy-hexose. Rhamnose occurs in nature in its L-form as L-rhamnose (6-deoxy-L-mannose). This is unusual, since most of the naturally occurring sugars are in D-form. Rhamnose is commonly bound to other sugars in nature. It is a common glycone component of glycosides from many plants. Rhamnose is also a component of the outer cell membrane of certain bacteria. L-rhamnose is metabolized to L-Lactaldehyde, which is a branching point in the metabolic pathway of L-fucose and L-rhamnose utilization. It exists in two anomeric forms, alpha-L-rhamnose and beta-L-rhamnose.|
HMDB0000854::Formiminoglutamic acid, also known as N-formimino-L-glutamate or acid, formiminoglutamic, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as glutamic acid and derivatives. Glutamic acid and derivatives are compounds containing glutamic acid or a derivative thereof resulting from reaction of glutamic acid at the amino group or the carboxy group, or from the replacement of any hydrogen of glycine by a heteroatom. Formiminoglutamic acid is slightly soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). Formiminoglutamic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, formiminoglutamic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Formiminoglutamic acid participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, Formiminoglutamic acid can be biosynthesized from 4-imidazolone-5-propionic acid through its interaction with the enzyme probable imidazolonepropionase. In addition, Tetrahydrofolic acid and formiminoglutamic acid can be converted into 5-formiminotetrahydrofolic acid and L-glutamic acid through the action of the enzyme formimidoyltransferase-cyclodeaminase. In humans, formiminoglutamic acid is involved in the histidine metabolism pathway. Formiminoglutamic acid is also involved in the metabolic disorder called the histidinemia pathway.|
HMDB0000870::Histamine is an amine derived by enzymatic decarboxylation of histidine. It is a powerful stimulant of gastric secretion, a constrictor of bronchial smooth muscle, a vasodilator, and also a centrally acting neurotransmitter.|
HMDB0000874::Tauroursodeoxycholic acid is a bile acid also known as TUDCA formed in the liver by conjugation of deoxycholate with taurine, usually as the sodium salt. TUDCA is able to prevent apoptosis and protect mitochondria from cellular elements that would otherwise interfere with energy production. One of these elements is a protein called Bax. TUDCA plays an important role in preventing Bax from being transported to the mitochondria. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ).|
HMDB0000884::Ribothymidine is an endogenous methylated nucleoside found in human fluids; methylated purine bases are present in higher amounts in tumor-bearing patients compared to healthy controls.DNA hypermethylation is a common finding in malignant cells and has been explored as a therapeutic target for hypomethylating agents. When chemical bonds to DNA, the DNA becomes damaged and proper and complete replication cannot occur to make the normal intended cell. A DNA adduct is an abnormal piece of DNA covalently-bonded to a cancer-causing chemical. This has shown to be the start of a cancerous cell, or carcinogenesis. DNA adducts in scientific experiments are used as bio-markers and as such are themselves measured to reflect quantitatively, for comparison, the amount of cancer in the subject. (PMID: 3506820  , 17044778  , 17264127  , 16799933  ).|
HMDB0000888::Undecanedioic acid has been found in parts of human aortas with advanced atherosclerotic lesions associated with intercellular matrix macromolecules and specifically with elastin, and may be the result of an increased hydrolysis of esters and (or) a decreased esterification. (PMID: 131675  ). Undecanedioic acid has been found (among other unusual dicarboxylic acids) in the urine from patients under hopantenate therapy during episodes of Reye's-like syndrome. (PMID: 2331533  ).|
HMDB0000896::Taurodeoxycholic acid is a bile salt formed in the liver by conjugation of deoxycholate with taurine, usually as the sodium salt. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ).|
HMDB0000944::Behenic acid, also docosanoic acid, is a normal carboxylic acid, a fatty acid with formula C21H43COOH. -- Wikipedia; It is an important constituent of the behen oil extracted from the seeds of the Ben-oil tree, and it is so named from the Persian month Bahman when the roots of this tree were harvested. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0000954::trans-Ferulic acid is a highly abundant phenolic phytochemical which is present in plant cell walls. trans-Ferulic acid is a phenolic acid that can be absorbed by the small intestine and excreted through the urine. It is one of the most abundant phenolic acids in plants, varying from 5 g/Kg in wheat bran to 9 g/kg in sugar-beet pulp and 50 g/kg in corn kernel. It occurs primarily in seeds and leaves both in its free form (rarely) and covalently linked to lignin and other biopolymers. It is usually found as ester cross-links with polysaccharides in the cell wall, such as arabinoxylans in grasses, pectin in spinach and sugar beet and xyloglucans in bamboo. It also can cross-link with proteins. Due to its phenolic nucleus and an extended side chain conjugation (carbohydrates and proteins), it readily forms a resonance stabilized phenoxy radical which accounts for its potent antioxidant potential. Food supplementation with curcumin and ferulic acid is considered a nutritional approach to reduce oxidative damage and amyloid pathology in Alzheimer disease. (PMID: 17127365  , 1398220  , 15453708  , 9878519  ).|
HMDB0000991::alpha-Aminooctanoic acid is an amino compound found occasionally in human urine. (PMID: 13447222  ). alpha-Aminooctanoic acid has been found in one case in the milk of a lactating mother at the 144th day of lactation. (Science and Culture (1960), 26 186-7.).|
HMDB0001008::Biliverdin is a green pigment formed as a byproduct of hemoglobin breakdown. It consists of four linearly connected pyrrole rings (a tetrapyrrole). Biliverdin is formed when the heme group in hemoglobin is cleaved at its alpha-methene bridge. The resulting biliverdin is then reduced to bilirubin, a yellow pigment, by the enzyme biliverdin reductase. The changing color of a bruise from deep purple to yellow over time is a graphical indicator of this reaction. Biliverdin occurs in the bile of amphibia and of birds, but not in normal human bile or serum.|
HMDB0001043::Arachidonic acid is a polyunsaturated, essential fatty acid that has a 20-carbon chain as a backbone and four cis-double bonds at the C5, C8, C11, and C14 positions. It is found in animal and human fat as well as in the liver, brain, and glandular organs, and is a constituent of animal phosphatides. It is synthesized from dietary linoleic acid. Arachidonic acid mediates inflammation and the functioning of several organs and systems either directly or upon its conversion into eicosanoids. Arachidonic acid in cell membrane phospholipids is the substrate for the synthesis of a range of biologically active compounds (eicosanoids) including prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes. These compounds can act as mediators in their own right and can also act as regulators of other processes, such as platelet aggregation, blood clotting, smooth muscle contraction, leukocyte chemotaxis, inflammatory cytokine production, and immune function. Arachidonic acid can be metabolized by cytochrome p450 (CYP450) enzymes into 5,6-, 8,9-, 11,12-, and 14,15-epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (EETs), their corresponding dihydroxyeicosatrienoic acids (DHETs), and 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (20-HETE). The production of kidney CYP450 arachidonic acid metabolites is altered in diabetes, pregnancy, hepatorenal syndrome, and in various models of hypertension, and it is likely that changes in this system contribute to the abnormalities in renal function that are associated with many of these conditions. Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) catalyzes the hydrolysis of the sn-2 position of membrane glycerophospholipids to liberate arachidonic acid (PMID: 12736897  , 12736897  , 12700820  , 12570747  , 12432908  ).|
HMDB0001161::4-Trimethylammoniobutanoic acid or gamma-butyrobetaine (GBB) is a highly water-soluble derivative of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA). It is also a precursor of L-carnitine. It is a substrate of gamma butyrobetaine hydroxylase/dioxygenase (also known as BBOX) which catalyzes the formation of L-carnitine from gamma-butyrobetaine, the last step in the L-carnitine biosynthesis pathway. Carnitine is essential for the transport of activated fatty acids across the mitochondrial membrane during mitochondrial beta-oxidation. 4-Trimethylammoniobutanoic acid is also a substrate and/or product for alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde dehydrogenase, aldehyde dehydrogenase (dimeric NADP-preferring), aldehyde dehydrogenase family 7 member A1, aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A3, aldehyde dehydrogenase (mitochondrial), fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase, aldehyde dehydrogenase X (mitochondrial), and 4-trimethylaminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase.|
HMDB0001227::5-Thymidylic acid is a thymine nucleotide. Also known as thymidine monophosphate, and abbreviated TMP, is a nucleotide that is found in DNA. It is an ester of phosphoric acid with the nucleoside thymidine. TMP consists of a phosphate group, esterified to the the pentose sugar deoxyribose moiety, and the nucleobase thymine. In mammalian cells, thymidine deprivation induces chromosome aberrations such as chromatid breaks, chromatid interchanges, and chromosome fragmentation. (PMID 3888175  ).|
HMDB0001370::Diaminopimelic acid or DAPA is a lysine-like amino acid derivative that is a key component of the bacterial cell wall. DAPA is incorporated or integrated into peptidoglycan of gram negative bacteria and is the attachment point for Braun's lipoprotein (BLP or Murein Lipoprotein). BLP is found in gram-negative cell walls and is one of the most abundant membrane proteins. BLP is bound at its C-terminal end (a lysine) by a covalent bond to the peptidoglycan layer (specifically to diaminopimelic acid molecules) and is embedded in the outer membrane by its hydrophobic head (a cysteine with lipids attached). BLP tightly links the two layers and provides structural integrity to the bacterial outer membrane. Diaminopimelic acid can be found in human urine or feces due to the lysis or enzymatic breakdown of gram negative gut microbes.|
HMDB0001388::Alpha-linolenic acid (ALA) is a polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA). It is a member of the group of essential fatty acids called omega-3 fatty acids. Alpha-linolenic acid, in particular, is not synthesized by mammals and therefore is an essential dietary requirement for all mammals. Certain nuts (English walnuts) and vegetable oils (canola, soybean, flaxseed/linseed, olive) are particularly rich in alpha-linolenic acid (ALA). Omega-3 fatty acids get their name based on the location of one of their first double bond. In all omega-3 fatty acids, the first double bond is located between the third and fourth carbon atom counting from the methyl end of the fatty acid (n-3). Although humans and other mammals can synthesize saturated and some monounsaturated fatty acids from carbon groups in carbohydrates and proteins, they lack the enzymes necessary to insert a cis double bond at the n-6 or the n-3 position of a fatty acid. Omega-3 fatty acids like a-linolenic acid are important structural components of cell membranes. When incorporated into phospholipids, they affect cell membrane properties such as fluidity, flexibility, permeability and the activity of membrane bound enzymes. Omega-3 fatty acids can modulate the expression of a number of genes, including those involved with fatty acid metabolism and inflammation. Alpha linolenic acid and other omega 3 fatty acids may regulate gene expression by interacting with specific transcription factors, including peroxisome proliferator activated receptors (PPARs) and liver X receptors (LXRs). Alpha-Linolenic acid is found to be associated with isovaleric acidemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0001432::Agmatine ((4-aminobutyl)guanidine, NH2-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2-NH-C(-NH2)(=NH)) is the decarboxylation product of the amino acid arginine and is an intermediate in polyamine biosynthesis. It is a putative neurotransmitter. It is synthesized in the brain, stored in synaptic vesicles, accumulated by uptake, released by membrane depolarization, and inactivated by agmatinase. Agmatine binds to 2-adrenergic receptor and imidazoline binding sites, and blocks NMDA receptors and other cation ligand-gated channels. Agmatine inhibits nitric oxide synthase (NOS), and induces the release of some peptide hormones. Treatment with exogenous agmatine exerts neuroprotective effects in animal models of neurotrauma. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0001496::7alpha-hydroxycholesterol is an oxysterol and can serve as a biomarker for lipid peroxidation. (PMID: 17386651  ) Products of cholesterol oxidation accumulate within atherosclerotic plaque and have been proposed to contribute to inflammatory signalling in the diseased artery. (PMID: 17364953  ). 7alpha-hydroxycholesterol is a cholesterol oxide that has been described as biomarker of oxidative stress in subjects with impaired glucose tolerance and diabetes. (PMID: 16634125  ).|
HMDB0001514::In the United States, glucosamine is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration for medical use in humans. Since glucosamine is classified as a dietary supplement, evidence of safety and efficacy is not required as long as it is not advertised as a treatment for a medical condition. Nevertheless, glucosamine is a popular alternative medicine used by consumers for the treatment of osteoarthritis. Glucosamine is also extensively used in veterinary medicine as an unregulated but widely accepted supplement (Nolen RS, 2002). Treatment with oral glucosamine is commonly used for the treatment of osteoarthritis. Since glucosamine is a precursor for glycosaminoglycans, and glycosaminoglycans are a major component of joint cartilage, supplemental glucosamine may help to rebuild cartilage and treat arthritis. However, there is little evidence that any clinical effect of glucosamine works this way (Laverty et al., 2005; Biggee et al., 2005). Its use as a therapy for osteoarthritis appears safe but there is conflicting evidence as to its effectiveness. Glucosamine (C6H14NO5) is an amino sugar that is an important precursor in the biochemical synthesis of glycosylated proteins and lipids.|
HMDB0001527::3-methylthiopropionate is one of the metabolites of methionine (especially of D-methionine) and pharmacokinetics of 3-MTP in urine seems to contribute to the clinicopathological investigation of the liver cirrhosis. (PMID 3997054  ).|
HMDB0001645::L-Norleucine is an unnatural amino acid that is used experimentally to study protein structure and function. It is structurally similar to methionine, however it does not contain sulfur. Aminocaproic acid works as an antifibrinolytic. It is a derivative of the amino acid lysine. It binds reversibly to the kringle domain of plasminogen and blocks the binding of plasminogen to fibrin and its activation to plasmin.|
HMDB0001844::Methylsuccinic acid is a normal metabolite found in human fluids. Increased urinary levels of Methylsuccinic acid (together with ethylmalonic acid) are the main biochemical measurable features in ethylmalonic encephalopathy (OMIM 602473   ), a rare metabolic disorder with an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance that is clinically characterized by neuromotor delay, hyperlactic acidemia, recurrent petechiae, orthostatic acrocyanosis, and chronic diarrhea (PMID 12382164  ). The underlying biochemical defect involves isoleucine catabolism (PMID 9667231  ). It has been found decreases in the urine of animals under D-serine-induced nephrotoxicity (D-Serine causes selective necrosis of the proximal straight tubules in the rat kidney) (PMID 15596249  ). Morevoer, Methylsuccinic acid is found to be associated with ethylmalonic encephalopathy, isovaleric acidemia, and medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, which are also inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0001856::Protocatechuic acid (3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid) is a natural phenolic compound found in many edible and medicinal plants. Recent studies indicate that it could be used as a protective agent against cardiovascular diseases and neoplasms. The mechanism of its action is mostly associated with antioxidant activity, including inhibition of generation as well as scavenging of free radicals and up-regulating enzymes which participate in their neutralization. (PMID 16407799  ).|
HMDB0001870::Benzoic acid, C6H5COOH, is a colourless crystalline solid and the simplest aromatic carboxylic acid. Benzoic acid occurs naturally free and bound as benzoic acid esters in many plant and animal species. Appreciable amounts have been found in most berries (around 0.05%). Cranberries contain as much as 300-1300 mg free benzoic acid per kg fruit. Benzoic acid is a fungistatic compound that is widely used as a food preservative. It often is conjugated to glycine in the liver and excreted as hippuric acid. Benzoic acid is a byproduct of phenylalanine metabolism in bacteria. It is also produced when gut bacteria process polyphenols (from ingested fruits or beverages).|
HMDB0001881::Propylene glycol (1,2-propanediol) is an organic compound (a diol alcohol), usually a tasteless, odorless, and colorless clear oily liquid that is hygroscopic and miscible with water, acetone, and chloroform. It is manufactured by the hydration of propylene oxide. Propylene glycol is used as a solvent for intravenous, oral, and topical pharmaceutical preparations It is generally considered safe. However in large doses it can be toxic, especially if given over a short period of time. Intravenous lorazepam contains the largest amount of propylene glycol of commonly used drugs. In adults with normal liver and kidney function, the terminal half-life of propylene glycol ranges from 1.4 to 3.3 hours. Propylene glycol is metabolized by the liver to form lactate, acetate, and pyruvate. The nonmetabolized drug is excreted in the urine mainly as the glucuronide conjugate, approximately 12 to 45 percent is excreted unchanged in urine. Renal clearance decreases as the dose administered increases (390 ml/minute/173 m2 at a dose of 5 g/day but only 144 ml/minute/173 m2 at a dose of 21 g/day). These data suggest that renal clearance declines at higher propylene glycol doses because of saturation of proximal tubular secretion of the drug. As an acceptable level of propylene glycol has not been defined, the clinical implication of a propylene glycol level is unclear. The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends a maximum consumption of 25 mg/kg/day (1.8 g/day for a 75 kg male) of propylene glycol when used as a food additive, but this limit does not address its use as a drug solvent. No maximum dose is recommended in the literature for intravenous therapy with propylene glycol. Intoxication occurs at much higher doses than the WHO dose limit and is exclusive to pharmacologic exposure.| Propylene glycol toxicity includes development of serum hyperosmolality, lactic acidosis, and kidney failure. It has been suggested that proximal tubular necrosis is the cause of acute kidney injury from propylene glycol. Along these lines, proximal tubular cell injury occurs in cultured human cells exposed to propylene glycol. Acute tubular necrosis was described with propylene glycol toxicity in a case of concomitant administration of intravenous lorazepam and trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole. Propylene glycol induced intoxication can also mimic sepsis or systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). Patients suspected of having sepsis with negative cultures should be evaluated for propylene glycol toxicity if they have been exposed to high dose lorazepam or other medications containing this solvent. (PMID: 17555487  ).|
HMDB0001921::1,1-Dimethylbiguanide or Metformin is a biguanide hypoglycemic agent used in the treatment of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus not responding to dietary modification. Metformin improves glycemic control by improving insulin sensitivity and decreasing intestinal absorption of glucose. Metformin is the most popular anti-diabetic drug in the United States and one of the most prescribed drugs in the country overall, with nearly 35 million prescriptions filled in 2006 for generic metformin alone.|
HMDB0001928::Hydrochlorothiazide is a thiazide diuretic often considered the prototypical member of this class. It reduces the reabsorption of electrolytes from the renal tubules. This results in increased excretion of water and electrolytes, including sodium, potassium, chloride, and magnesium. It has been used in the treatment of several disorders including edema, hypertension, diabetes insipidus, and hypoparathyroidism. -- Pubchem. Hydrochlorothiazide (Apo-Hydro, Aquazide H, Microzide, Oretic), sometimes abbreviated HCT, HCTZ, or HZT is a popular diuretic drug that acts by inhibiting the kidney's ability to retain water. This reduces the volume of the blood, decreasing peripheral vascular resistance. Chlorothiazide, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor. --Wikipedia.|
HMDB0001929::Levofloxacin is a synthetic fluoroquinolone antibacterial agent that inhibits the supercoiling activity of bacterial DNA gyrase, halting DNA replication. Levofloxacin is marketed by Ortho-McNeil under the trade name Levaquin. Chemically, levofloxacin is the S-enantiomer (L-isomer) of ofloxacin. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0001932::Metoprolol is a selective beta1 receptor blocker used in treatment of several diseases of the cardiovascular system. It is marketed under the brand name Lopressor by Novartis, and Toprol (in the USA); Seleken or Selokeen (elsewhere); A selective adrenergic beta-1-blocking agent with no stimulatory action. It's binding to plasma albumin is weaker than alprenolol and it may be useful in the treatment of several diseases of the cardiovascular system; Metoprolol is a selective beta1 receptor blocker used in treatment of several diseases of the cardiovascular system. It is marketed under the brand name Lopressor by Novartis, and Toprol (in the USA); Seleken or Selokeen (elsewhere); as Minax by Alphapharm (in Australia), as Betaloc by AstraZeneca and as Corvitol by Berlin-Chemie AG; A selective adrenergic beta-1-blocking agent with no stimulatory action. It's binding to plasma albumin is weaker than alprenolol and it may be useful in angina pectoris, hypertension, or cardiac arrhythmias; as Minax by Alphapharm (in Australia), as Betaloc by AstraZeneca and as Corvitol by Berlin-Chemie AG.|
HMDB0001964::Caffeic acid, also known as caffeate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as hydroxycinnamic acids. Hydroxycinnamic acids are compounds containing an cinnamic acid where the benzene ring is hydroxylated. Caffeic acid exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Caffeic acid has been found in human epidermis and prostate tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, urine, and blood. Caffeic acid is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, 5-O-cis-caffeoylquinic acid, malvidin 3-O-{6-O-[(Z)-caffeoyl]-beta-D-glucoside}, and (2S,3R)-cis-caftaric acid. Caffeic acid is formally rated as a possible carcinogen (by IARC 2B) and is also a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0001982::3,7-Dimethyluric acid is a methyl derivative of uric acid, found occasionally in human urine. 3,7-Dimethyluric is one of the purine components in urinary calculi. Methylated purines originate from the metabolism of methylxanthines (caffeine, theophylline and theobromine). Methyluric acids are indistinguishable from uric acid by simple methods routinely used in clinical laboratories, requiring the use of high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Purine derivatives in urinary calculi could be considered markers of abnormal purine metabolism. The content of a purine derivative in stone depends on its average urinary excretion in the general population, similarity to the chemical structure of uric acid, and content of the latter in stone. This suggests that purines in stones represent a solid solution with uric acid as solvent. It is also plausible that methylxanthines, ubiquitous components of the diet and drugs, are involved in the pathogenesis of urolithiasis. Caffeine is metabolized via successive pathways mainly catalyzed by CYP1A2, xanthine oxidase or N-acetyltransferase-2 to give 14 different metabolites. CYP1A2 activity shows an inter-individual variability among the population. CYP1A2, an isoform of the CYP1A cytochrome P450 super-family, is involved in the metabolism of many drugs and plays a potentially important role in the induction of chemical carcinogenesis. (PMID: 11712316  , 15833286  , 3506820  , 15013152  ).|
HMDB0001988::4-Hydroxycyclohexylcarboxylic acid, also known as 4-hchc, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as cyclohexanols. Cyclohexanols are compounds containing an alcohol group attached to a cyclohexane ring. 4-Hydroxycyclohexylcarboxylic acid is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 4-Hydroxycyclohexylcarboxylic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, urine, and blood. |
HMDB0001999::Eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA or also icosapentaenoic acid) is an important polyunsaturated fatty acid found in fish oils. It serves as the precursor for the prostaglandin-3 and thromboxane-3 families. A diet rich in eicosapentaenoic acid lowers serum lipid concentration, reduces incidence of cardiovascular disorders, prevents platelet aggregation, and inhibits arachidonic acid conversion into the thromboxane-2 and prostaglandin-2 families. Eicosapentaenoic acid is an omega-3 fatty acid. In physiological literature, it is given the name 20:5(n-3). Its systematic chemical name is all-cis-5,8,11,14,17-icosapentaenoic acid. It also has the trivial name timnodonic acid. Chemically, EPA is a carboxylic acid with a 20-carbon chain and five cis double bonds; the first double bond is located at the third carbon from the omega end. Because of the presence of double bonds, EPS is a polyunsaturated fatty acid. Metabolically it acts as a precursor for prostaglandin-3 (which inhibits platelet aggregation), thromboxane-3, and leukotriene-5 groups. It is found in fish oils of cod liver, herring, mackerel, salmon, menhaden, and sardine. It is also found in human breast milk (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0002005::Methionine sulfoxide is an oxidation product of methionine with reactive oxygen species via 2-electron-dependent mechanism. Such oxidants can be generated from activated neutrophils; therefore, methionine sulfoxide can be regarded as a biomarker of oxidative stress in vivo. (PMID 12576054  ).|
HMDB0002017::1-Phenylethylamine, or alpha-phenethylamine, is an amine. Individual enantiomers of this basic compound are useful for performing chiral resolution of acidic compounds by forming diastereomeric salts. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0002064::N-Acetylputrescine is a polyamine commonly occurring excreted in normal human urine (PMID 7775374  ). N-Acetylputrescine is the most abundant of all polyamines both in normal individuals and in patients with leukemia (PMID 9464484  ). N-Acetylputrescine is the N-acetylated form of the naturally occurring polyamine called putrescine. The N-acetylation is mediated by the enzyme diamine N-acetyltransferase. Putrescine is related to cadaverine (another polyamine). Both are produced by the breakdown of amino acids in living and dead organisms and both are toxic in large doses. Putrescine and cadaverine are largely responsible for the foul odor of putrefying flesh, but also contribute to the odor of such processes as bad breath and bacterial vaginosis. Putrescine is also found in semen. Putrescine attacks s-adenosyl methionine and converts it to spermidine. Spermidine in turn attacks another s-adenosyl methionine and converts it to spermine. Putrescine is synthesized in small quantities by healthy living cells by the action of ornithine decarboxylase.|
HMDB0002088::N-Oleoylethanolamine (NOE or OEA) is a N-acylethanolamine. N-acylethanolamines (NAEs) constitute a class of lipid compounds naturally present in both animal and plant membranes as constituents of the membrane-bound phospholipid, N-acylphosphatidylethanolamine (NAPE). NAPE is composed of a third fatty acid moiety linked to the amino head group of the commonly occurring membrane phospholipid, phosphatidylethanolamine. NAEs are released from NAPE by phospholipase D-type hydrolases in response to a variety of stimuli. Transient NAE release and accumulation has been attributed a variety of biological activities, including neurotransmission, membrane protection, and immunomodulation in animals. N-oleoylethanolamine is an inhibitor of the sphingolipid signaling pathway, via specific ceramidase inhibition (ceramidase converts ceramide to sphingosine). N-oleoylethanolamine blocks the effects of TNF- and arachidonic acid on intracellular Ca concentration. (PMID: 12692337  , 12056855  , 12560208  , 11997249  ). N-oleoyl ethanolamine is related to the endocannabinoid anandamide. Endocannabinoids signal through cannabinoid receptors (also stimulated by the active ingredient of cannabis) but although related in structure, synthesis and degradation to anandamide, NOE cannot be considered an endocannabinoid as it does not activate the cannabinoid receptors. Most of the reported responses to NOE can be attributed to activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-alpha (PPAR-alpha). Administration of NOE inhibits body weight gain in rats. In adipocytes and hepatocytes, NOE inhibits mitogenic and metabolic signaling by the insulin receptor and produces glucose intolerance. It also inhibits gastric emptying, which might act together with the sensory neuronal signals to achieve satiety. NOE is permanently elevated in diabetic obese patients. NOE also reduces visceral and inflammatory responses through a PPAR-alpha-activation independent mechanism (PMID: 17449181  ). NOE has been shown to be an antagonist of TRVP1 (the transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 receptor). Overall, NOE has beneficial effects on health by inducing food intake control, lipid beta-oxidation, body weight loss and analgesic effects (PMID: 18704536  ).|
HMDB0002100::N-Palmitoylethanolamide (PEA) is present in the tissues of most mammals. It was initially described as an agonist of the type 2 cannabinoid receptor (CB2), although it is now universally recognized that PEA is in fact incapable of binding to cannabinoid receptors, or at least not to the known receptors. In addition to its anti-inflammatory activity, PEA also produces analgesia, neuroprotection, and possesses anti-epileptic properties. It also reduces gastrointestinal motility and cancer cell proliferation, as well as protecting the vascular endothelium in the ischemic heart. The physiological stimuli that regulate PEA levels in mammalian tissues are largely unknown, however, multiple studies indicate that this lipid accumulates during cellular stress, particularly following tissue injury. For example, PEA increases post-mortem in the pig brain. Similar elevations in PEA levels have been observed in the ischemic brain and PEA is also up-regulated in response to ultraviolet-B irradiation in mouse epidermal cells. Adipose tissue is highly implicated in the systemic secretion of IL-6 and leptin, and human mature adipocytes are able to secrete large quantity of PEA. Human adipose tissue can be subjected to modulation of its inflammatory state by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). LPS strongly inhibits adipose cell leptin release, with PEA acting as a potentiator of this inhibitory effect. These actions are not linked to a reduction in leptin gene transcription. Thus, PEA does not have an anti-inflammatory role in the secretion of IL-6 via NFkappaB at the adipocyte level, but instead seems to act at the heart of the LPS-stimulated pathway, which, independently of NFkappaB, inhibits the secretion of leptin. (PMID: 16884908  ).|
HMDB0002183::Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) is an omega-3 essential fatty acid. Chemically, DHA is a carboxylic acid with a 22-carbon chain and six cis double bonds with the first double bond located at the third carbon from the omega end. DHA is most often found in fish oil. It is a major fatty acid in sperm and brain phospholipids, especially in the retina. Dietary DHA can reduce the level of blood triglycerides in humans, which may reduce the risk of heart disease (Wikipedia). Docosahexaenoic acid is found to be associated with isovaleric acidemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0002199::Desaminotyrosine is a normal constituent of human urine. A product of tyrosine metabolism; concentration in urine increases in patients with gastrointestinal diseases. (Dictionary of Organic Compounds). It is considered also that may result from metabolism to phenolic acids by colonic bacteria. (PMID 15315398  ).|
HMDB0002212::Arachidic acid also called eicosanoic acid is a saturated fatty acid found in peanut oil. It can be formed by the hydrogenation of arachidonic acid. It is practically insoluble in water and stable under ordinary conditions -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0002259::Heptadecanoic acid is a fatty acid of exogenous (primarily ruminant) origin. Many "odd" length long chain amino acids are derived from the consumption of dairy fats (milk and meat). Heptadecanoic acid constitutes 0.61% of milk fat and 0.83% of ruminant meat fat. The content of heptadecanoic acid in the subcutaneous adipose tissue of humans appears to be a good biological marker of long-term milk fat intake in free-living individuals in populations with high consumption of dairy products. (PMID 9701185  ).|
HMDB0002264:: belongs to the class of organic compounds known as medium-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 4 and 12 carbon atoms. Thus, is considered to be a fatty acid lipid molecule. is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, is primarily located in the cytoplasm and adiposome.|
HMDB0002269::Curcumin is a natural component of the rhizome of turmeric (Curcuma longa) and one of the most powerful chemopreventive and anticancer agents. Its biological effects range from antioxidant, anti-inflammatory to inhibition of angiogenesis and is also shown to possess specific antitumoral activity. The molecular mechanism of its varied cellular effects has been studied in some details and it has been shown to have multiple targets and interacting macromolecules within the cell. Curcumin has been shown to possess anti-angiogenic properties and the angioinhibitory effects of curcumin manifest due to down regulation of proangiogenic genes such as VEGF and angiopoitin and a decrease in migration and invasion of endothelial cells. One of the important factors implicated in chemoresistance and induced chemosensitivity is NFkB and curcumin has been shown to down regulate NFkB and inhibit IKB kinase thereby suppressing proliferation and inducing apoptosis. Cell lines that are resistant to certain apoptotic inducers and radiation become susceptible to apoptosis when treated in conjunction with curcumin. Besides this it can also act as a chemopreventive agent in cancers of colon, stomach and skin by suppressing colonic aberrant crypt foci formation and DNA adduct formation.| This review focuses on the various aspects of curcumin as a potential drug for cancer treatment and its implications in a variety of biological and cellular processes vis-à-vis its mechanism of action (PMID: 16712454  ). Turmeric (Zingiberaceae family) rhizomes, has been widely used for centuries in indigenous medicine for the treatment of a variety of inflammatory conditions and other diseases. Its medicinal properties have been attributed mainly to the curcuminoids and the main component present in the rhizome is curcumin. Curcumin has been shown to possess wide range of pharmacological activities including anti-inflammatory, anti-cancer, anti-oxidant, wound healing and anti-microbial effects. Recently, curcumin treatment has been shown to correct defects associated with cystic fibrosis in homozygous DeltaF508 cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) knock out mice. In vivo and in vitro studies have demonstrated curcumin's ability to inhibit carcinogenesis at three stages: tumor promotion, angiogenesis and tumor growth. Curcumin suppresses mitogen-induced proliferation of blood mononuclear cells, inhibits neutrophil activation and mixed lymphocyte reaction and also inhibits both serum-induced and platelet derived growth factor (PDGF)-dependent mitogenesis of smooth muscle cells. It has also been reported to be a partial inhibitor of protein kinase. The other salient feature of turmeric/curcumin is that despite being consumed daily for centuries in Asian countries, it has not been shown to cause any toxicity (PMID: 16413584  ).|
HMDB0002271::Imidazolepropionic acid, also known as deaminohistidine or 4-imidazolylpropionate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as imidazolyl carboxylic acids and derivatives. These are organic compounds containing a carboxylic acid chain (of at least 2 carbon atoms) linked to an imidazole ring. Imidazolepropionic acid exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Imidazolepropionic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and blood. Imidazolepropionic acid can be biosynthesized from propionic acid. |
HMDB0002284::N-Acetylcadaverine is the acetylated form of the polyamine cadaverine. Cadaverine is produced by the breakdown of amino acids in living and dead organisms and is toxic in large doses. Cadaverine is largely responsible for the foul odor of putrefying flesh, but also contributes to the odor of such processes as bad breath and bacterial vaginosis. Cadaverine is also found in semen. Polyamines (and their acetylated forms) are known to be closely related with cell growth, cell proliferation, and synthesis of proteins and nucleic acids. Their concentrations are adjusted either by regulating the activity levels of the biosynthetic and catabolic reactions or by controlling the net direction of polyamine acetylation-deacetylation. In Alzheimer's disease (AD), the neurotoxic amyloid β-peptide is known to up-regulate polyamine metabolism by increasing ornithine decarboxylase activity and polyamine uptake by initiating free radical damage. Because of these findings, polyamines have been considered to play an important role in response to neurodegenerative conditions. Altered levels of polyamines have been found in tissue, hair and body fluids of patients with neuromuscular diseases and neurodegenerative conditions. (PMID: 17723614  ).|
HMDB0002302::Indole-3-propionic acid (IPA, indole-3-propionate, or indolepropionic acid), is a deamination product of tryptophan formed by symbiotic bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract of mammals and birds. It is endogenously produced by human microbiota and has only been detected in vivo when the species Clostridium sporogenes is present in the gastrointestinal tract (PMID: 19234110  ).  Indole-3-propionic acid is an even more potent scavenger of hydroxyl radicals than melatonin, the most potent scavenger of hydroxyl radicals that is synthesized by the human body. Similar to melatonin but unlike other antioxidants, indole-3-propionic acid scavenges radicals without subsequently generating reactive and pro-oxidant intermediate compounds (PMID: 9928448  ). Indole-3-propionic acid has been shown to prevent oxidative stress and death of primary neurons and neuroblastoma cells exposed to the amyloid beta-protein in the form of amyloid fibrils, one of the most prominent neuropathologic features of Alzheimer's disease. Indole-3-propionic acid also shows a strong level of neuroprotection in two other paradigms of oxidative stress. (PMID: 10319516  ). More recently it has been found that higher indole-3-propionic acid levels in serum/plasma are associated with reduced likelihood of type 2 diabetes and with higher levels of consumption of fiber-rich foods (PMID: 28397877  ).|
HMDB0002322::Cadaverine is a foul-smelling diamine formed by bacterial decarboxylation of lysine that occurs during protein hydrolysis during putrefaction of animal tissue. However, this diamine is not purely associated with putrefaction. It is also produced in small quantities by mammals. In particular, it is partially responsible for the distinctive smell of urine and semen. Elevated levels of cadaverine have been found in the urine of some patients with defects in lysine metabolism. Cadaverine is toxic in large doses. In rats it had a low acute oral toxicity of more than 2000 mg/kg body weight (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0002350::Octadenol is a fatty alcohol present in human and is normally incorporated into plasmalogen lipids. Patients with the autosomal recessive form of rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (AR-RCDP) have elevated octadenol levels, but tended to be normal in other generalized peroxisomal disorders such as neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy and Zellweger syndrome (peroxisomal disorders are deficient in the incorporation of fatty alcohol into plasmalogen lipids). (PMID: 8373640  ). Sjogren-Larsson syndrome is defined by the triad of ichthyosis, mental retardation, and spasticity, and patients accumulate fatty alcohols such as Octadenol in the plasma and cultured fibroblasts. (PMID: 2241202  ). Sjogren-Larsson syndrome (SLS) is an autosomal recessive disorder associated with reduced activity of the fatty alcohol: NAD+ oxidoreductase complex (FAO). SLS patients are specifically deficient in the fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase (FALDH) component of FAO. Measurement of FAO and FALDH detection for SLS, FAO and FALDH activities in cultured skin fibroblasts using the 18-carbon substrate Octadenol is useful for SLS carrier detection. (PMID: 1583866  ). Patients with Sjogren-Larsson syndrome accumulate long-chain fatty alcohol in plasma, with a greater relative accumulation of Octadenol. (PMID: 2666627  ).|
HMDB0002364::Oleanolic acid is a pentacyclic triterpene, found in the non-glyceride fraction of olive pomace oil (Olive pomace oil, also known as "orujo" olive oil, is a blend of refined-pomace oil and virgin olive oil, fit for human consumption). Pentacyclic triterpenes are natural compounds which are widely distributed in plants. These natural products have been demonstrated to possess anti-inflammatory properties. Triterpenoids have been reported to possess antioxidant properties, since they prevent lipid peroxidation and suppress superoxide anion generation. The triterpenes have a history of medicinal use in many Asian countries. Oleanolic acid exhibits both pro- and anti-inflammatory properties depending on chemical structure and dose and may be useful in modulating the immune response; further studies are required to confirm the immunomodulatory behaviour of this triterpenoid, and characterise the mechanisms underlying the biphasic nature of some aspects of the inflammatory response. Oleanolic acid is a ubiquitous triterpenoid in plant kingdom, medicinal herbs, and is an integral part of the human diet. During the last decade over 700 research articles have been published on triterpenoids research, reflecting tremendous interest and progress in our understanding of these compounds. This included the isolation and purification of these tritepernoids from various plants and herbs, the chemical modifications to make more effective and water soluble derivatives, the pharmacological research on their beneficial effects, the toxicity studies, and the clinical use of these triterpenoids in various diseases including anticancer chemotherapies. (PMID: 17292619  , 15522132  , 15994040  ).|
HMDB0002368::Nervonic acid is a long chain unsaturated fatty acid that is enriched in sphingomyelin. It consists of choline, sphingosine, phosphoric acid, and fatty acid. Nervonic acid may enhance the brain functions and prevent demyelination (Chemical Land21). Research shows that there is negative relationship between nervonic acid and obesity-related risk factors (PMID: 16394593  ). Demyelination in adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is associated with an accumulation of very long chain saturated fatty acids stemming from a genetic defect in the peroxisomal beta oxidation system responsible for the chain shortening of these fatty acids. Sphingolipids from post mortem ALD brain have decreased levels of nervonic acid, 24:1(n-9), and increased levels of stearic acid, 18:0. (PMID: 8072429  ).|
HMDB0002372::N-Phenylacetylphenylalanine (PAP) is a peptide analogue used as a potential antisickling agent. This biaromatic agent has properties that make it a suitable candidate for the development of a useful therapeutic agent for the treatment of sickle cell disease. (PMID: 3663644  , 6587344  ).|
HMDB0002466::Produced in the gut microflora as one of the three main metabolites formed from the catechin diet. Its use in the production of glycol benzoates for the application of plasticizer in adhesive formulations is increasing. It is also used in the manufacture of alkyd resins and drilling mud additive for crude oil recovery applications. It is used as a rubber polymerization activators and retardants.|
HMDB0002545::Aldehydo-D-galacturonate, also known as D-galacturonic acid, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as glucuronic acid derivatives. Glucuronic acid derivatives are compounds containing a glucuronic acid moiety (or a derivative), which consists of a glucose moiety with the C6 carbon oxidized to a carboxylic acid. Aldehydo-D-galacturonate is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Aldehydo-D-galacturonate has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, aldehydo-D-galacturonate is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Aldehydo-D-galacturonate exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Outside of the human body, aldehydo-D-galacturonate can be found in a number of food items such as cocoa bean, wild celery, sunflower, and okra. This makes aldehydo-D-galacturonate a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0002639::Sulfolithocholylglycine is an acyl glycine and a bile acid-glycine conjugate. It is a secondary bile acid produced by the action of enzymes existing in the microbial flora of the colonic environment. In hepatocytes, both primary and secondary bile acids undergo amino acid conjugation at the C-24 carboxylic acid on the side chain, and almost all bile acids in the bile duct therefore exist in a glycine conjugated form (PMID:16949895  ). Sulfolithocholylglycine is a sulfated bile acids which has a greater renal clearance rate than lithocholylglycine.|
HMDB0002670::Naringenin (not to be confused with naringin) is a flavanone that is considered to have a bioactive effect on human health as antioxidant, free radical scavenger, antiinflammatory, carbohydrate metabolism promoter, immunity system modulater. This substance has also been shown to repair DNA. Scientists exposed cells to 80 micomoles of naringenin per liter, for 24 hours, and found that the amount of hydroxyl damage to the DNA was reduced by 24 percent in that very short period of time. Unfortunately, this bioflavonoid is difficult to absorb on oral ingestion. Only 15% of ingested naringenin will get absorbed, in the human gastrointestinal tract, in the best case scenario. A full glass of orange juice will supply about enough naringenin to achieve a concentration of about 0.5 micromoles per liter. But, one has to wonder, if given more time than 24 hours, would lower concentrations have similar effects. Wikipedia. Naringenin is a biomarker for the consumption of citrus fruits.|
HMDB0002759::Androsterone sulfate (Andros-S) is the most abundant 5-alpha-reduced androgen metabolite in serum (PMID: 8380602  ). Androsterone sulfate is clinically recognized as one of the major androgen metabolites found in urine. It is a cognate substrate for human dehydroepiandrosterone sulfotransferase, which catalyzes the transfer of the sulfonate group from 3'-phosphoadenosine-5'-phosphosulfate to dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) (PMID: 14573603  ).|
HMDB0002815::LysoPC(18:1(9Z)) is a lysophospholipid (LyP). It is a monoglycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. Lysophosphatidylcholines can have different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 (sn-1) position. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. LysoPC(18:19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position. The oleic acid moiety, an omega-9 fatty acid, is derived from various animal and vegetable sources such as olive oil, acai and grapeseed oil. Lysophosphatidylcholine is found in small amounts in most tissues. It is formed by hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by the enzyme phospholipase A2, as part of the de-acylation/re-acylation cycle that controls its overall molecular species composition. It can also be formed inadvertently during extraction of lipids from tissues if the phospholipase is activated by careless handling. In blood plasma significant amounts of lysophosphatidylcholine are formed by a specific enzyme system, lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), which is secreted from the liver. The enzyme catalyzes the transfer of the fatty acids of position sn-2 of phosphatidylcholine to the free cholesterol in plasma, with formation of cholesterol esters and lysophosphatidylcholine. Lysophospholipids have a role in lipid signaling by acting on lysophospholipid receptors (LPL-R). LPL-R's are members of the G protein-coupled receptor family of integral membrane proteins.|
HMDB0002869::Campesterol is a phytosterol, meaning it is a steroid derived from plants. As a food additive, phytosterols have cholesterol-lowering properties (reducing cholesterol absorption in intestines), and may act in cancer prevention. Phytosterols naturally occur in small amount in vegetable oils, especially soybean oil. One such phytosterol complex, isolated from vegetable oil, is cholestatin, composed of campesterol, stigmasterol, and brassicasterol, and is marketed as a dietary supplement. Sterols can reduce cholesterol in human subjects by up to 15%. The mechanism behind phytosterols and the lowering of cholesterol occurs as follows : the incorporation of cholesterol into micelles in the gastrointestinal tract is inhibited, decreasing the overall amount of cholesterol absorbed. This may in turn help to control body total cholesterol levels, as well as modify HDL, LDL and TAG levels. Many margarines, butters, breakfast cereals and spreads are now enriched with phytosterols and marketed towards people with high cholesterol and a wish to lower it. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0002902::Tocopherol, or Vitamin E, is a fat-soluble vitamin in eight forms that is an important antioxidant. Vitamin E is often used in skin creams and lotions because it is believed to play a role in encouraging skin healing and reducing scarring after injuries such as burns. -- Wikipedia; Natural vitamin E exists in eight different forms or isomers, four tocopherols and four tocotrienols. All isomers have a chromanol ring, with a hydroxyl group which can donate a hydrogen atom to reduce free radicals and a hydrophobic side chain which allows for penetration into biological membranes. There is an alpha, beta, gamma and delta form of both the tocopherols and tocotrienols, determined by the number of methyl groups on the chromanol ring. Each form has its own biological activity, the measure of potency or functional use in the body. -- Wikipedia; Alpha-tocopherol is traditionally recognized as the most active form of vitamin E in humans, and is a powerful biological antioxidant. The measurement of "vitamin E" activity in international units (IU) was based on fertility enhancement by the prevention of spontaneous abortions in pregnant rats relative to alpha tocopherol. It increases naturally to about 150% of normal in the maternal circulation during human pregnancies. 1 IU of vitamin E is defined as the biological equivalent of 0.667 milligrams of d-alpha-tocopherol, or of 1 milligram of dl-alpha-tocopherol acetate. The other isomers are slowly being recognized as research begins to elucidate their additional roles in the human body.| Many naturopathic and orthomolecular medicine advocates suggest that vitamin E supplements contain at least 20% by weight of the other natural vitamin E isomers. Commercially available blends of natural vitamin E include "mixed tocopherols" and "high gamma tocopherol" formulas. Also selenium, Coenzyme Q10, and ample vitamin C have been shown to be essential cofactors of natural tocopherols. -- Wikipedia; Synthetic vitamin E, usually marked as d,l-tocopherol or d,l tocopheryl acetate, with 50% d-alpha tocopherol moiety and 50% l-alpha-tocopherol moiety, as synthesized by an earlier process is now actually manufactured as all-racemic alpha tocopherol, with only about one alpha tocopherol molecule in 8 molecules as actual d-alpha tocpherol. The synthetic form is not as active as the natural alpha tocopherol form. The 1950's thalidomide disaster with numerous severe birth defects is a common example of d- vs l- epimer forms type problem with synthesized racemic mixtures. Information on any side effects of the synthetic vitamin E epimers is not readily available. Naturopathic and orthomolecular medicine advocates have long considered the synthetic vitamin E forms to be with little or no merit for cancer, circulatory and heart diseases. -- Wikipedia; Abetalipoproteinemia is a rare inherited disorder of fat metabolism that results in poor absorption of dietary fat and vitamin E. The vitamin E deficiency associated with this disease causes problems such as poor transmission of nerve impulses, muscle weakness, and degeneration of the retina that can cause blindness. Individuals with abetalipoproteinemia may be prescribed special vitamin E supplements by a physician to treat this disorder. -- Wikipedia;| Recent studies also show that vitamin E acts as an effective free radical scavenger and can lower the incidence of lung cancer in smokers. The effects are opposite to that of the clinical trials based on administering carotenoid to male smokers, that resulted in increased risk of lung cancer. Hence vitamin E is an effective antagonist to the oxidative stress that is imposed by high carotenoids in certain patients. -- Wikipedia;| A cataract is a condition of clouding of the tissue of the lens of the eye. They increase the risk of disability and blindness in aging adults. Antioxidants are being studied to determine whether they can help prevent or delay cataract growth. Observational studies have found that lens clarity, which is used to diagnose cataracts, was better in regular users of vitamin E supplements and in persons with higher blood levels of vitamin E. A study of middle aged male smokers, however, did not demonstrate any effect from vitamin E supplements on the incidence of cataract formation. The effects of smoking, a major risk factor for developing cataracts, may have overridden any potential benefit from the vitamin E, but the conflicting results also indicate a need for further studies before researchers can confidently recommend extra vitamin E for the prevention of cataracts. It is important to note that the term "cataract" may be used in common parlance for an opacity involving any tissue of the eye, for example a corneal scar. Thus a character in theater or on television who is blind from cataracts might have white instead of clear corneas, covering over the iris and pupil. Since the lens is behind the pupil, real cataracts are difficult to see without special instrumentation, so people with cataracts have rather normally appearing eyes. -- Wikipedia; Alzheimer's disease is a wasting disease of the brain. An observational trial conducted by The Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health found that when vitamin E is taken daily in large doses (400-1000IU) in combination with vitamin C (500-1000mg) the onset of Alzheimer's was reduced between 64 and 78%. External Link - Johns Hopkins press release -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0002917::Xylitol is a five-carbon sugar alcohol that is obtained through the diet. It is not endogenously produced by humans. Xylitol is used as a diabetic sweetener which is roughly as sweet as sucrose with 33% fewer calories. Xylitol is naturally found in many fruits (strawberries, plums, raspberries) and vegetables (e.g. cauliflower). Because of fruit and vegetable consumption the human body naturally processes 15 grams of xylitol per day. Xylitol can be produced industrially starting from primary matters rich in xylan which is hydrolyzed to obtain xylose. It is extracted from hemicelluloses present in the corn raids, the almond hulls or the barks of birch (or of the by-products of wood: shavings hard, paper pulp). Of all polyols, it is the one that has the sweetest flavor (it borders that of saccharose). It gives a strong refreshing impression, making xylitol an ingredient of choice for the sugarless chewing gum industry. In addition to his use in confectionery, it is used in the pharmaceutical industry for certain mouthwashes and toothpastes and in cosmetics (creams, soaps, etc.). Xylitol is produced starting from xylose, the isomaltose, by enzymatic transposition of the saccharose (sugar). Xylitol is not metabolized by cariogenic (cavity-causing) bacteria and gum chewing stimulates the flow of saliva; as a result, chewing xylitol gum may prevent dental caries. Chewing xylitol gum for 4 to 14 days reduces the amount of dental plaque. The reduction in the amount of plaque following xylitol gum chewing within 2 weeks may be a transient phenomenon. Chewing xylitol gum for 6 months reduced mutans streptococci levels in saliva and plaque in adults (PMID: 17426399   , 15964535   ).| Studies have also shown xylitol chewing gum can help prevent acute otitis media (ear aches and infections) as the act of chewing and swallowing assists with the disposal of earwax and clearing the middle ear, while the presence of xylitol prevents the growth of bacteria in the eustachian tubes. Xylitol is well established as a life-threatening toxin to dogs. The number of reported cases of xylitol toxicosis in dogs has significantly increased since the first reports in 2002. Dogs that have ingested foods containing xylitol (greater than 100 milligrams of xylitol consumed per kilogram of bodyweight) have presented with low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), which can be life-threatening. Xylitol is found to be associated with ribose-5-phosphate isomerase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0002925::8,11,14-Eicosatrienoic acid is a 20-carbon-chain omega-6 fatty acid unsaturated at positions 8, 11, and 14. It differs from arachidonic acid (5,8,11,14-eicosatetraenoic acid) only at position 5. 8,11,14-Eicosatrienoic acid is also known as dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid (DGLA). In physiological literature, it is given the name 20:3(n-6). DGLA is the elongation product of the 18-carbon gamma-linolenic acid (GLA). DGLA can be converted into prostaglandin E1 (PGE1). PGE1 inhibits platelet aggregation and also exerts a vasodilatory effect. DGLA competes with arachadonic acid for COX and lipoxygenase, inhibiting the production of arachadonic acid's eicosanoids.|
HMDB0003156::2,3-Butanediol is an isomer of butanediol. The 2R,3R stereoisomer of 2,3-butanediol is produced by a variety of microorganisms, in a process known as butanediol fermentation. 2,3-Butanediol fermentation is the anaerobic fermentation of glucose with 2,3-butanediol as one of the end products. The overall stoichiometry of the reaction is 2 pyruvate + NADH --> 2CO2 + 2,3-butanediol. Butanediol fermentation is typical for Enterobacter species or microbes found in the gut. 2,3-butanediol has been identified in the sera of alcoholics and it may be a specific marker of alcohol abuse (PMID: 6139706  ). In humans, 2,3-butanediol is oxidized to acetyl-CoA via acetoin. 2,3-Butanediol is also found in cocoa butter.|
HMDB0003213::Trisaccharide. A trisaccharide occurring in Australian manna (from Eucalyptus spp, Myrtaceae) and in cottonseed meal. -- Pubchem; Raffinose is a complex carbohydrate, a trisaccharide composed of galactose, fructose, and glucose. It can be found in beans, cabbage, brussels sprouts, broccoli, asparagus, other vegetables, and whole grains. Raffinose is hydrolysed to D-galactose and sucrose by D-galactosidase (D-GAL) (1). D-GAL also hydrolyses other D-galactosides such as stachyose, verbascose, and galactinol [1-O-(D-galactosyl)-myoinositol], if present. The enzyme does not cleave linked galactose, as in lactose. -- Wikipedia; Raffinose is also known as melitose and may be thought of as galactose + sucrose connected via an alpha(1-6) glycosidic linkage and so raffinose can be broken apart into galactose and sucrose via the enzyme alpha-galactosidase. Human intestines do not contain this enzyme. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0003217::Genistein is one of several known isoflavones. Isoflavones compounds, such as genistein and daidzein, are found in a number of plants, but soybeans and soy products like tofu and textured vegetable protein are the primary food source.| Genistein is a natural bioactive compound derived from legumes and has drawn because of its potentially beneficial effects on some human degenerative diseases. It has a weak estrogenic effect and is a well-known non-specific tyrosine kinase inhibitor at pharmacological doses. Epidemiological studies show that genistein intake is inversely associated with the risk of cardiovascular diseases. Data suggests a protective role of genistein in cardiovascular events. However, the mechanisms of the genistein action on vascular protective effects are unclear. Past extensive studies exploring its hypolipidemic effect resulted in contradictory data. Genistein also is a relatively poor antioxidant. However, genistein protects against pro-inflammatory factor-induced vascular endothelial barrier dysfunction and inhibits leukocyte-endothelium interaction, thereby modulating vascular inflammation, a major event in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Genistein exerts a non-genomic action by targeting on important signaling molecules in vascular endothelial cells (ECs). Genistein rapidly activates endothelial nitric oxide synthase and production of nitric oxide in ECs. This genistein effect is novel since it is independent of its known effects, but mediated by the cyclic adenosine monophosphate/protein kinase A (cAMP/PKA) cascade. Genistein directly stimulates the plasma membrane-associated adenylate cyclases, leading to activation of the cAMP signaling pathway. In addition, genistein activates peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors, ligand-activated nuclear receptors important to normal vascular function. Furthermore, genistein reduces reactive oxygen species (ROS) by attenuating the expression of ROS-producing enzymes. These findings reveal the roles for genistein in the regulation of vascular function and provide a basis for further investigating its therapeutic potential for inflammatory-related vascular disease. (PMID: 17979711  , Curr Med Chem. 2007;14(24):2581-9.). Genistein is a biomarker for the consumption of soy beans and other soy products|
HMDB0003224::Deoxyribose is an aldopentose, a monosaccharide containing five carbon atoms, and including an aldehyde functional group. It is derived from the pentose sugar ribose by the replacement of the hydroxyl group at the 2 position with hydrogen, leading to the net loss of an oxygen atom, and has chemical formula C5H10O4. In deoxyribose, the carbon furthest from the attached carbon is stripped of the oxygen atom in what would be a hydroxyl group in ribose. The common base adenine (a purine derivative) coupled to deoxyribose is called deoxyadenosine. The 5-triphosphate derivative of adenosine, commonly called adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is an important energy transport molecule in cells. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0003236::Solanidine is a steroidal alkaloid, and its glycosides have been reported to have caused poisoning in man and animals. Solanidine is present in sera of healthy individuals and in amounts dependent on their dietary potato consumption. (PMID: 4007882  ).|
HMDB0003320::Indole-3-carboxylic acid, also known as 3-indolecarboxylate or 3-indoleformate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as indolecarboxylic acids and derivatives. Indolecarboxylic acids and derivatives are compounds containing a carboxylic acid group (or a derivative thereof) linked to an indole. Indole-3-carboxylic acid exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Indole-3-carboxylic acid has been primarily detected in feces. Indole-3-carboxylic acid is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, 4-O-(1H-indol-3-ylcarbonyl)ascaroside, 3-indole carboxylic acid glucuronide, and tropisetron. Outside of the human body, indole-3-carboxylic acid can be found in a number of food items such as wakame, pomes, cucumber, and common beet. This makes indole-3-carboxylic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0003355::5-aminovalerate (or 5-aminopentanoic acid) is a lysine degradation product.  It can be produced both endogenously or through bacterial catabolism of lysine.  5-aminovalerate is formed via the following multi-step reaction: L-lysine leads to cadverine leads to L-piperideine leads 5-aminovalerate (PMID: 405455  ).  In other words it is a metabolite of cadaverine which is formed via the intermediate, 1-piperideine (PMID: 6436440  ).  Cadaverine is a foul-smelling diamine compound produced by protein hydrolysis during putrefaction of animal tissue. High levels of 5-aminovalerate in biofluids may indicate bacterial overgrowth or endogenous tissue necrosis.  In most cases  endogenous 5-aminovalerate is thought to be primarily a microbial metabolite produced by the gut or oral microflora, although it can be produced endogenously.  5-aminovalerate is a normal metabolite present in human saliva, with a tendency to elevated concentration in patients with chronic periodontitis. Bacterial contamination and decomposition of salivary proteins is primarily responsible for elevated salivary levels (PMID 3481959  ). Beyond being a general waste product, 5-aminovalerate is also believed to act as a methylene homologue of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and functions as a weak GABA agonist (PMID: 4031870  ). It is also known as an antifibrinolytic amino acid analog and so it functions as a weak inhibitor of the blood clotting pathway (PMID: 6703712  ). 5-aminopentanoic acid is an in vivo substrate of 4-aminobutyrate:2-oxoglutarate aminotransferase (PMID: 4031870  ).|
HMDB0003374::D-Ornithine is an amino acid produced in the urea cycle by the splitting off of urea from arginine. Ornithine is one of the products of the action of the enzyme arginase on L-arginine, creating urea. Therefore, ornithine is a central part of the urea cycle, which allows for the disposal of excess nitrogen.|
HMDB0003424::Cetyl alcohol, also known as 1-hexadecanol and palmityl alcohol, is a solid organic compound and a member of the alcohol class of compounds. Its chemical formula is CH3(CH2)15OH. At room temperature, cetyl alcohol takes the form of a waxy white solid or flakes. It belongs to the group of fatty alcohols. With the demise of commercial whaling, cetyl alcohol is no longer primarily produced from whale oil, but instead either as an end-product of the petroleum industry, or produced from vegetable oils such as palm oil and coconut oil. Production of cetyl alcohol from palm oil gives rise to one of its alternative names, palmityl alcohol.|
HMDB0003681::4-Acetamidobutanoic acid, also known as 4-acetamidobutanoate or N-acetyl-4-aminobutyric acid, is a member of the class of compounds known as gamma amino acids and derivatives. These compounds are amino acids having an -NH2 group attached to the gamma carbon atom. 4-Acetamidobutanoic acid is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 4-Acetamidobutanoic acid can be found in a number of food items such as Rubus species (blackberry, raspberry), cassava, pepper (C. frutescens), and napa cabbage, which makes 4-acetamidobutanoic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. 4-Acetamidobutanoic acid can be found in blood, feces, and urine, as well as in human prostate tissue. 4-Acetamidobutanoic acid exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. 4-Acetamidobutanoic acid is a GABA derivative, a product of the urea cycle and the metabolism of amino groups, and the product of NAD-linked aldehyde dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.3) (KEGG).|
HMDB0003818::5-Androstenediol is a direct metabolite of the most abundant steroid produced by the human adrenal cortex, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). 5-Androstenediol is less androgenic than 4-androstenediol, and stimulates the immune system. When administered to rats in vivo, 5-androstenediol has approximately 1/70 the androgenicity of DHEA, 1/185 the androgenicity of androstenedione, and 1/475 the androgenicity of testosterone (Wikipedia). Because it induces production of white blood cells and platelets, 5-androstenediol is being developed as a radiation countermeasure as Neumune (HE2100). An intermediate in testosterone biosynthesis, found in the testis or the adrenal glands. 5-Androstenediol, derived from dehydroepiandrosterone by the reduction of the 17-keto group (17-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases), is converted to testosterone by the oxidation of the 3-beta hydroxyl group to a 3-keto group (3-fydroxysteroid dehydrogenase).|
HMDB0003911::beta-aminoisobutyric acid is the product from the conversion of N-carbamyl-beta-aminoisobutyric acid by the enzyme Beta-ureidopropionase (EC 3.5.1.6), the last step in pyrimidine degradation. Beta-ureidopropionase deficiency is an inborn error of pyrimidine degradation associated with neurological abnormalities (OMIM 606673  ).|
HMDB0004136::D-Threitol can be regarded as the main end product of D-xylose metabolism in hummans. Threitol is a C4-polyol (tetritol); the total C4-polyol concentration of threitol decreases with age. Several inborn errors of metabolism with abnormal polyol concentrations in body fluids are known to date (such as pentosuria and galactosemia). Most of these defects can be diagnosed by the assessment of urinary concentrations of polyols. Several studies have revealed that urinary levels of some polyols may vary in diseases associated with carbohydrate metabolism derangements such as diabetes mellitus and uremia. The abnormal occurrence of various polyols in diseases with a specific enzyme deficiency such as pentosuria and galactosemia has also been reported (PMID: 908147  , 16435188  , 14988808  , Analytical Sciences (1990), 6(5), 657-66.). Moreover, D-Threitol is found to be associated with ribose-5-phosphate isomerase deficiency, which is also an inborn error of metabolism. Threitol in the urine is a biomarker for the consumption of apples and other fruits.|
HMDB0004157::Urobilinogen is an uribiniloid, the product of bilirubin reduction in multiple sequential reactions. Urobilinogens are colorless chromogens that may in turn be oxidized to respective yellow oxidation products, urobilins. Under normal conditions only small amounts of bilirubin can be found in stools of adults while urobilinoids are predominant bile pigments (50-250 mg/day). Only negligible amounts of fecal urobilinoids are present in the intestinal lumen of infants during the first months of their life, due to undeveloped intestinal microflora capable of reducing bilirubin. This presumably contributes importantly to the pathogenesis of neonatal jaundice. In adults, the urobilinoid production is highly efficient. (PMID: 16504607  ).|
HMDB0004159::L-Urobilin or Stercobilin is a byproduct of bilirubin degradation. It is a tetrapyrrole chemical compound, responsible for the typical brown color of human feces. In urine, it is responsible for the yellow color of human urine. It is created by bacterial action on bilirubin and subsequent oxidation. In plasma virtually all the bilirubin is tightly bound to plasma proteins, largely albumin, because it is only sparingly soluble in aqueous solutions at physiological pH. In the sinusoids unconjugated bilirubin dissocates from albumin, enters the liver cells across the cell membrane through non-ionic diffusion to the smooth endoplasmatic reticulum, where it is converted to a water-soluble ester glucuronide by bilirubin UDP-glucuronyl transferase. Following conjugation, bilirubin is transferred rapidly across the canalicular membrane into the bile canaliculi. In the intestinal tract bilirubin is reduced to urobilinogen, which is subsequently reabsorbed to some extent into the enterohepatic circulation, removed from plasma by the liver and excreted unchanged in the bile. The residual part of urobilinogen is further reduced to urobilin, stercobilin and dipyrrolmethenes and excreted in the feces.|
HMDB0004161::Urobilin is one of the final by-products of hemoglobin breakdown. Urobilin is excreted in both the urine and feces from many mammals, particularly humans. It is primarily responsible for the yellow color of urine. The breakdown of hemoglobin to biliverdin is common to most animals, while the next step, the conversion of biliverdin to bilirubin, and subsequently to the urobilinogens (urobilin is one particular oxidized chemical form of urobilinogen) is unique to mammals. (PMID: 16604237  ).|
HMDB0004193::N-methyl-2-pyridone-5-carboxamide (2PY) is one of the end products of nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide (NAD) degradation. Increased serum 2PY concentrations are observed in chronic renal failure (CRF) patients, which along with the deterioration of kidney function and its toxic properties (significant inhibition of PARP-1), suggests that 2PY is an uremic toxin. (PMID 12694300  ).|
HMDB0004400::5-Acetylamino-6-amino-3-methyluracil (AAMU) is one of caffeine major metabolites. Analysis of caffeine and its metabolites is of interest with respect to caffeine exposure, for kinetic and metabolism studies and for opportunistic in vivo estimation of drug metabolizing enzyme activity in humans and animals. Urinary caffeine metabolite ratios are used in humans to assess the activity of cytochrome P450 1A2 (CYP1A2), xanthine oxidase and N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2), which are involved in the activation or detoxification of various xenobiotic compounds, including carcinogens. Investigating the activity of these enzymes is of clinical relevance for assessing intra- and inter-individual differences in NAT2- and CYP1A2-mediated drug metabolism, and for evaluating the risk of developing specific exposure-related diseases. (PMID: 3506820  , 15685651  , 12534641  ).|
HMDB0004827::Proline betaine is an osmoprotective compound found in urine. It is thought to serve an osmoprotective role for the kidney. Proline betaine is a glycine betaine analogue found in many citrus foods. Elevated levels of proline betaine in human urine are found after the consumption of citrus fruits and juices (PMID: 18060588  ). Proline betaine is a biomarker for the consumption of citrus fruits.|
HMDB0004947::Ceramides (N-acylsphingosine) are one of the hydrolysis byproducts of sphingomyelin by the enzyme sphingomyelinase (sphingomyelin phosphorylcholine phosphohydrolase E.C.3.1.4.12) which has been identified in the subcellular fractions of human epidermis (PMID 25935  ) and many other tissues. They can also be synthesized from serine and palmitate in a de novo pathway and are regarded as important cellular signals for inducing apoptosis (PMID 14998372  ). Is key in the biosynthesis of glycosphingolipids and gangliosides.|
HMDB0004948::Ceramides (N-acylsphingosine) are one of the hydrolysis byproducts of sphingomyelin by the enzyme sphingomyelinase (sphingomyelin phosphorylcholine phosphohydrolase E.C.3.1.4.12) which has been identified in the subcellular fractions of human epidermis (PMID 25935  ) and many other tissues. They can also be synthesized from serine and palmitate in a de novo pathway and are regarded as important cellular signals for inducing apoptosis (PMID 14998372  ). Is key in the biosynthesis of glycosphingolipids and gangliosides. Ceramide (D18:1/9Z-18:1) is found to be associated with Fabry disease, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0004949::Ceramides (N-acylsphingosine) are one of the hydrolysis byproducts of sphingomyelin by the enzyme sphingomyelinase (sphingomyelin phosphorylcholine phosphohydrolase E.C.3.1.4.12) which has been identified in the subcellular fractions of human epidermis (PMID 25935  ) and many other tissues. They can also be synthesized from serine and palmitate in a de novo pathway and are regarded as important cellular signals for inducing apoptosis (PMID 14998372  ). Is key in the biosynthesis of glycosphingolipids and gangliosides.|
HMDB0004950::Ceramides (N-acylsphingosine) are one of the hydrolysis byproducts of sphingomyelin by the enzyme sphingomyelinase (sphingomyelin phosphorylcholine phosphohydrolase E.C.3.1.4.12) which has been identified in the subcellular fractions of human epidermis (PMID 25935  ) and many other tissues. They can also be synthesized from serine and palmitate in a de novo pathway and are regarded as important cellular signals for inducing apoptosis (PMID 14998372  ). Is key in the biosynthesis of glycosphingolipids and gangliosides.|
HMDB0004951::Ceramides (N-acylsphingosine) are one of the hydrolysis byproducts of sphingomyelin by the enzyme sphingomyelinase (sphingomyelin phosphorylcholine phosphohydrolase E.C.3.1.4.12) which has been identified in the subcellular fractions of human epidermis (PMID 25935  ) and many other tissues. They can also be synthesized from serine and palmitate in a de novo pathway and are regarded as important cellular signals for inducing apoptosis (PMID 14998372  ). Is key in the biosynthesis of glycosphingolipids and gangliosides.|
HMDB0004952::Ceramides (N-acylsphingosine) are one of the hydrolysis byproducts of sphingomyelin by the enzyme sphingomyelinase (sphingomyelin phosphorylcholine phosphohydrolase E.C.3.1.4.12) which has been identified in the subcellular fractions of human epidermis (PMID 25935  ) and many other tissues. They can also be synthesized from serine and palmitate in a de novo pathway and are regarded as important cellular signals for inducing apoptosis (PMID 14998372  ). Is key in the biosynthesis of glycosphingolipids and gangliosides.|
HMDB0004953::Ceramides (N-acylsphingosine) are one of the hydrolysis byproducts of sphingomyelin by the enzyme sphingomyelinase (sphingomyelin phosphorylcholine phosphohydrolase E.C.3.1.4.12) which has been identified in the subcellular fractions of human epidermis (PMID 25935  ) and many other tissues. They can also be synthesized from serine and palmitate in a de novo pathway and are regarded as important cellular signals for inducing apoptosis (PMID 14998372  ). Is key in the biosynthesis of glycosphingolipids and gangliosides.|
HMDB0004955::Ceramides (N-acylsphingosine) are one of the hydrolysis byproducts of sphingomyelin by the enzyme sphingomyelinase (sphingomyelin phosphorylcholine phosphohydrolase E.C.3.1.4.12) which has been identified in the subcellular fractions of human epidermis (PMID 25935  ) and many other tissues. They can also be synthesized from serine and palmitate in a de novo pathway and are regarded as important cellular signals for inducing apoptosis (PMID 14998372  ). Is key in the biosynthesis of glycosphingolipids and gangliosides.|
HMDB0004956::Ceramides (N-acylsphingosine) are one of the hydrolysis byproducts of sphingomyelin by the enzyme sphingomyelinase (sphingomyelin phosphorylcholine phosphohydrolase E.C.3.1.4.12) which has been identified in the subcellular fractions of human epidermis (PMID 25935  ) and many other tissues. They can also be synthesized from serine and palmitate in a de novo pathway and are regarded as important cellular signals for inducing apoptosis (PMID 14998372  ). Is key in the biosynthesis of glycosphingolipids and gangliosides.|
HMDB0004957::Ceramides (N-acylsphingosine) are one of the hydrolysis byproducts of sphingomyelin by the enzyme sphingomyelinase (sphingomyelin phosphorylcholine phosphohydrolase E.C.3.1.4.12) which has been identified in the subcellular fractions of human epidermis (PMID 25935  ) and many other tissues. They can also be synthesized from serine and palmitate in a de novo pathway and are regarded as important cellular signals for inducing apoptosis (PMID 14998372  ). Is key in the biosynthesis of glycosphingolipids and gangliosides.|
HMDB0005006::Atorvastatin is a member of the drug class known as statins, used for lowering cholesterol and thereby reducing cardiovascular disease. Atorvastatin inhibits a rate-determining enzyme located in hepatic tissue used in cholesterol synthesis, which lowers the amount of cholesterol produced. This also has the effect of lowering the total amount of LDL cholesterol; Atorvastatin is a member of the drug class known as statins, used for lowering cholesterol and thereby reducing cardiovascular disease. Atorvastatin inhibits a rate-determining enzyme located in hepatic tissue used in cholesterol synthesis, which lowers the amount of cholesterol produced. This also has the effect of lowering the total amount of LDL cholesterol; As with other statins, atorvastatin is a competitive inhibitor of HMG-CoA reductase. Unlike most others, however, it is a completely synthetic compound. HMG-CoA reductase catalyzes the reduction of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) to mevalonate, which is the rate-limiting step in hepatic cholesterol biosynthesis. Inhibition of the enzyme decreases de novo cholesterol synthesis, increasing expression of low-density lipoprotein receptors (LDL receptors) on hepatocytes. This increases the LDL uptake by the hepatocytes, decreasing the amount of LDL in the blood.|
HMDB0005015::Gabapentin was originally developed as a chemical analogue of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) to reduce the spinal reflex for the treatment of spasticity and was found to have anticonvulsant activity in various seizure models. In addition, it also displays antinociceptive activity in various animal pain models. Clinically, gabapentin is indicated as an add-on medication for the treatment of partial seizures, and neuropathic pain. It was also claimed to be beneficial in several other clinical disorders such as anxiety, bipolar disorder, and hot flashes. The possible mechanisms or targets involved in the multiple therapeutic actions of gabapentin have been actively studied. Since gabapentin was developed, several hypotheses had been proposed for its action mechanisms. They include selectively activating the heterodimeric GABA(B) receptors consisting of GABA(B1a) and GABA(B2) subunits, selectively enhancing the NMDA current at GABAergic interneurons, or blocking AMPA-receptor-mediated transmission in the spinal cord, binding to the L-alpha-amino acid transporter, activating ATP-sensitive K(+) channels, activating hyperpolarization-activated cation channels, and modulating Ca(2+) current by selectively binding to the specific binding site of [(3)H]gabapentin, the alpha(2)delta subunit of voltage-dependent Ca(2+) channels. Different mechanisms might be involved in different therapeutic actions of gabapentin. In this review, we summarized the recent progress in the findings proposed for the antinociceptive action mechanisms of gabapentin and suggest that the alpha(2)delta subunit of spinal N-type Ca(2+) channels is very likely the analgesic action target of gabapentin. (PMID: 16474201  ).|
HMDB0005060::Eicosadienoic acid is an omega 6 fatty acid found in human milk (PMID: 15256803  ). Omega-6 fatty acids) are a family of unsaturated fatty acids which have in common a carbon-carbon double bond in the n<U+2212>6 position; that is, the sixth bond from the end of the fatty acid. The biological effects of the omega<U+2212>6 fatty acids are largely mediated by their conversion to n-6 eicosanoids that bind to diverse receptors found in every tissue of the body.|
HMDB0005199::Salsolinol is an endogenous catechol isoquinoline detected in humans. Salsolinol was detected in urine of parkinsonian patients administered with L-DOPA. This finding stimulated the studies on Salsolinol derivatives in the brain, and gave new aspects of the endogenous alkaloids, which had been considered to occur only in plants. In normal non-alcoholic subjects and alcoholics, Salsolinol and O-methylated Salsolinol were found in urine, cerebrospinal fluid and brains. Salsolinol has an asymmetric center at first position and exists as (R)- and (S)enantiomer. The (R)enantiomer of Salsolinol is predominant in urine from healthy volunteers. Only the (R)enantiomers of Salsolinol and N-methylated Salsolinol occur in the human brain, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and intraventricular fluid (IVF), and the (S)enantiomers were not detected. (R)salsolinol synthase catalyzes the enantio-selective synthesis of (R)Salsolinol and 1-carboxyl(R)Salsolinol from dopamine with acetaldehyde or pyruvic acid. The N-methylation of (R)salsolinol into N-methylsalsolinol (NMSal) is catalyzed by two N-methyltransferases with different optimum pH, at pH 7.0 and 8.4. NM(R)Salsolinol is enzymatically oxidized into 1,2-dimethyl-6,7-dihydroxyisoquinolinium ion (DMDHIQ+) by an oxidase sensitive to semicarbaside and also non-enzymatically by autoxidation. NM(R)Salsolinol and its precursor, dopamine, were found to occur selectively in the nigro-striatum, whereas (R)Salsolinol distributes uniformly among the brain regions. (PMID 14697894  ).|
HMDB0005807::Gallic acid is an organic acid, also known as 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid, found in gallnuts, sumac, witch hazel, tea leaves, oak bark, and other plants. The chemical formula is C6H2(OH)3CO2H. Gallic acid is found both free and as part of tannins. It is commonly used in the pharmaceutical industry. Gallic acid can also be used to synthesize the hallucinogenic alkaloid mescaline, also known as 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenethylamine. Salts and esters of gallic acid are termed gallates. (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0006101::Enterolactone is a mammalian lignan that have a similar biphenolic structure to lignans from plants. Lignans are compounds with estrogenic properties and are probably the most important source of phytoestrogens in western diets. Mammalian lignans are formed from precursors that are contained mainly in vegetables, whole grain products and berries, via action of intestinal microflora. Enterolactone is produced in the colon by the action of bacteria on secoisolariciresinol, matairesinol and its glycosides. Secoisolariciresinol is converted to enterodiol which is subsequently converted to enterolactone as it passes through the colon. Matairesinol is converted directly to enterolactone. Enterolactone have been shown to possess weakly estrogenic and antiestrogenic activities, and it has been suggested that the high production of this antiestrogenic mammalian lignans in the gut may serve to protect against breast cancer in women and prostate cancer in men; however epidemiological evidence to date is conflicting. (PMID: 16168401  , 12270221  , 11216511  , 12107024  ). Enterolactone is a biomarker for the consumption of soy beans and other soy products.|
HMDB0006119::7b-Hydroxycholesterol is identified in atheromatous plaques and in plasma of atherosclerotic patients.(PMID: 16604541  ). 7b-Hydroxycholesterol induces apoptosis in Caco-2 cells and alters Lysosomal membrane integrity. It exhibites a specific enhancement of oxidative stress and of endonuclease G expression. (PMID: 17136497  ).|
HMDB0010378::5,8,11-Eicosatrienoic acid (Mead acid) is a carboxylic acid with a 20-carbon chain and three methylene-interrupted cis double bonds. The first double bond is located at the ninth carbon from the omega end. In physiological literature, it is given the name 20:3(n-9). In the presence of lipoxygenase, Mead acid can form various hydroxy products (HETE). It is the only polyunsaturated fatty acid that the body can make de novo. Its elevated presence in the blood is an indication of essential fatty acid (EFA)deficiency. During dietary EFA insufficiency, especially arachidonic acid deficiency, the body will make Mead acid by the elongation and desaturation of oleic acid. (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0011130::LysoPE(18:0/0:0) or LPE(18:0/0:0) is a lysophospholipid. The term 'lysophospholipid' (LPL) refers to any phospholipid that is missing one of its two O-acyl chains. Thus, LPLs have a free alcohol in either the sn-1 or sn-2 position. The prefix 'lyso-' comes from the fact that lysophospholipids were originally found to be hemolytic however it is now used to refer generally to phospholipids missing an acyl chain. LPLs are usually the result of phospholipase A-type enzymatic activity on regular phospholipids such as phosphatidylcholine or phosphatidic acid, although they can also be generated by the acylation of glycerophospholipids or the phosphorylation of monoacylglycerols. Some LPLs serve important signaling functions such as lysophosphatidic acid. Lysophosphatidylethanolamines (LPEs) can function as plant growth regulators with several diverse uses. (LPEs) are approved for outdoor agricultural use to accelerate ripening and improve the quality of fresh produce. They are also approved for indoor use to preserve stored crops and commercial cut flowers. As a breakdown product of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), LPE is present in cells of all organisms.|
HMDB0011170::gamma-Glutamylisoleucine is a dipeptide composed of gamma-glutamate and isoleucine, and is a proteolytic breakdown product of larger proteins. It belongs to the family of N-acyl-alpha amino acids and derivatives. These are compounds containing an alpha amino acid which bears an acyl group at its terminal nitrogen atom. gamma-Glutamylisoleucine is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. It is found in urine (PMID: 3782411  ).|
HMDB0011171::gamma-Glutamylleucine is a dipeptide composed of gamma-glutamate and leucine, and is a proteolytic breakdown product of larger proteins. It belongs to the family of N-acyl-alpha amino acids and derivatives. These are compounds containing an alpha amino acid which bears an acyl group at its terminal nitrogen atom. gamma-Glutamylleucine is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. gamma-Glutamylleucine is a biomarker for the consumption of whey protein. It is found in urine (PMID: 3782411  ).|
HMDB0011503::LysoPE(16:0/0:0) is a lysophosphatidylethanolamine or a lysophospholipid. The term 'lysophospholipid' (LPL) refers to any phospholipid that is missing one of its two O-acyl chains. Thus, LPLs have a free alcohol in either the sn-1 or sn-2 position. The prefix 'lyso-' comes from the fact that lysophospholipids were originally found to be hemolytic however it is now used to refer generally to phospholipids missing an acyl chain. LPLs are usually the result of phospholipase A-type enzymatic activity on regular phospholipids such as phosphatidylcholine or phosphatidic acid, although they can also be generated by the acylation of glycerophospholipids or the phosphorylation of monoacylglycerols. Some LPLs serve important signaling functions such as lysophosphatidic acid. Lysophosphatidylethanolamines (LPEs) can function as plant growth regulators with several diverse uses. (LPEs) are approved for outdoor agricultural use to accelerate ripening and improve the quality of fresh produce. They are also approved for indoor use to preserve stored crops and commercial cut flowers. As a breakdown product of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), LPE is present in cells of all organisms.|
HMDB0011506::LysoPE(18:1(9Z)/0:0) is a lysophosphatidylethanolamine or a lysophospholipid. The term 'lysophospholipid' (LPL) refers to any phospholipid that is missing one of its two O-acyl chains. Thus, LPLs have a free alcohol in either the sn-1 or sn-2 position. The prefix 'lyso-' comes from the fact that lysophospholipids were originally found to be hemolytic however it is now used to refer generally to phospholipids missing an acyl chain. LPLs are usually the result of phospholipase A-type enzymatic activity on regular phospholipids such as phosphatidylcholine or phosphatidic acid, although they can also be generated by the acylation of glycerophospholipids or the phosphorylation of monoacylglycerols. Some LPLs serve important signaling functions such as lysophosphatidic acid. Lysophosphatidylethanolamines (LPEs) can function as plant growth regulators with several diverse uses. (LPEs) are approved for outdoor agricultural use to accelerate ripening and improve the quality of fresh produce. They are also approved for indoor use to preserve stored crops and commercial cut flowers. As a breakdown product of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), LPE is present in cells of all organisms.|
HMDB0011507::LysoPE(18:2(9Z,12Z)/0:0) is a lysophosphatidylethanolamine or a lysophospholipid. The term 'lysophospholipid' (LPL) refers to any phospholipid that is missing one of its two O-acyl chains. Thus, LPLs have a free alcohol in either the sn-1 or sn-2 position. The prefix 'lyso-' comes from the fact that lysophospholipids were originally found to be hemolytic however it is now used to refer generally to phospholipids missing an acyl chain. LPLs are usually the result of phospholipase A-type enzymatic activity on regular phospholipids such as phosphatidylcholine or phosphatidic acid, although they can also be generated by the acylation of glycerophospholipids or the phosphorylation of monoacylglycerols. Some LPLs serve important signaling functions such as lysophosphatidic acid. Lysophosphatidylethanolamines (LPEs) can function as plant growth regulators with several diverse uses. (LPEs) are approved for outdoor agricultural use to accelerate ripening and improve the quality of fresh produce. They are also approved for indoor use to preserve stored crops and commercial cut flowers. As a breakdown product of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), LPE is present in cells of all organisms.|
HMDB0011538::MG(0:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011567::MG(18:1(9Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011568::MG(18:2(9Z,12Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011569::MG(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011616::Adenosine 2',3'-cyclic phosphate is part of the purine metabolism pathway. In this pathway, 2',3'-cyclic AMP is reversibly converted to 3'-AMP via the enzyme 2',3'-cyclic-nucleotide 2'-phosphodiesterase (EC 3.1.4.16). (KEGG).|
HMDB0011635::p-Cresol sulfate is a microbial metabolite that is found in urine and likely derives from secondary metabolism of p-cresol. It appears to be elevated in the urine of individuals with progressive multiple sclerosis (PMID: 10775436  ). p-Cresol sulfate is the major component of urinary MBPLM (myelin basic protein-like material). p-Cresol sulfate is a small protein-bound molecule that is poorly cleared with dialysis and is often considered to be a uremic toxin. Uremic toxins include low-molecular-weight compounds such as indoxyl sulfate, p-cresol sulfate, 3-carboxy-4-methyl-5-propyl-2-furanpropionic acid, and asymmetric dimethylarginine (PMID: 18941347  ). It has also been linked to cardiovascular disease and oxidative injury.|
HMDB0011724::4-hydroxybenzyl alcohol is the cleavage product produced during the biosynthesis of the thiazole moiety of thiamine from tyrosine as part of the thiamine biosynthesis pathway. It is a derivative of benzyl alcohol which is used as a local anesthetic and to reduce pain associated with Lidocaine injection. Also, it is used in the manufacture of other benzyl compounds, as a pharmaceutical aid, and in perfumery and flavoring. Benzyl Alcohol is an aromatic alcohol used in a wide variety of cosmetic formulations as a fragrance component, preservative, solvent, and viscosity-decreasing agent. Benzyl Alcohol is metabolized to Benzoic Acid, which reacts with glycine and excreted as hippuric acid in the human body. Acceptable daily intakes were established by the World Health Organization at 5 mg/kg for Benzyl Alcohol. No adverse effects of benzyl alcohol have been seen in chronic exposure animal studies using rats and mice.| Effects of Benzyl Alcohol in chronic exposure animal studies are limited to reduced feed intake and reduced growth. Some differences have been noted in one reproductive toxicity study using mice, but these were limited to lower maternal body weights and decreased mean litter weights. Another study also noted that fetal weight was decreased compared to controls, but a third study showed no differences between control and benzyl alcohol-treated groups. Benzyl Alcohol has been associated with an increased number of resorptions and malformations in hamsters, but there have been no reproductive or developmental toxicity findings in studies using mice and rats. Genotoxicity tests for benzyl alcohol are mostly negative, but there were some assays that were positive. Carcinogenicity studies, however, were negative.| Clinical data indicates that benzyl alcohol can produce nonimmunologic contact urticaria and nonimmunologic immediate contact reactions, characterized by the appearance of wheals, erythema, and pruritis. 5% benzyl alcohol can elicit a reaction. Benzyl Alcohol is not a sensitizer at 10%. Benzyl Alcohol could be used safely at concentrations up to 5%, but that manufacturers should consider the nonimmunologic phenomena when using benzyl alcohol in cosmetic formulations designed for infants and children. Additionally, Benzyl Alcohol is considered safe up to 10% for use in hair dyes. The limited body exposure, the duration of use, and the frequency of use are considered in concluding that the nonimmunologic reactions would not be a concern. Because of the wide variety of product types in which benzyl alcohol may be used, it is likely that inhalation may be a route of exposure. The available safety tests are not considered sufficient to support the safety of benzyl alcohol in formulations where inhalation is a route of exposure. Inhalation toxicity data are needed to complete the safety assessment of benzyl alcohol where inhalation can occur. (PMID: 11766131  ).|
HMDB0011731::5-Keto-D-gluconate is metabolized from glucose in certain bacterial species. It is an intermediate in L-idonate degradation and ketogluconate metabolism. 5-Keto-D-gluconate 5-reductase catalyzes the reversible reduction of 5-ketogluconate to D-gluconate. This is the second reaction of the L-idonate catabolic pathway after uptake of L-idonate into the cell. The enzyme specifically reduces 5-ketogluconate using either NADH or NADPH. The enzyme is also specific for D-gluconate oxidation using NADP as the coenzyme, NAD does not serve as a coenzyme.|
HMDB0011733::The simplest peptide, made of two glycine molecules; used in the synthesis of more complicated peptides. Glycine is a simple, nonessential amino acid, although experimental animals show reduced growth on low-glycine diets. The average adult ingests 3 to 5 grams of glycine daily. Glycine is involved in the body's production of DNA, phospholipids and collagen, and in release of energy. Glycine levels are effectively measured in plasma in both normal patients and those with inborn errors of glycine metabolism. (http://www.dcnutrition.com/AminoAcids/) Nonketotic hyperglycinaemia (OMIM 606899  ) is an autosomal recessive condition caused by deficient enzyme activity of the glycine cleavage enzyme system (EC 2.1.1.10). The glycine cleavage enzyme system comprises four proteins: P-, T-, H- and L-proteins (EC 1.4.4.2, EC 2.1.2.10 and EC 1.8.1.4 for P-, T- and L-proteins). Mutations have been described in the GLDC (OMIM 238300  ), AMT (OMIM 238310  ), and GCSH (OMIM 238330  ) genes encoding the P-, T-, and H-proteins respectively. The glycine cleavage system catalyses the oxidative conversion of glycine into carbon dioxide and ammonia, with the remaining one-carbon unit transferred to folate as methylenetetrahydrofolate. It is the main catabolic pathway for glycine and it also contributes to one-carbon metabolism. Patients with a deficiency of this enzyme system have increased glycine in plasma, urine and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with an increased CSF: plasma glycine ratio. (PMID 16151895  ).|
HMDB0011737::gamma-Glutamylglutamic acid is a dipeptide composed of gamma-glutamate and glutamic acid. Glutamic acid (Glu), also referred to as glutamate (the anion), is one of the 20 proteinogenic amino acids. It is not among the essential amino acids. Glutamate is a key molecule in cellular metabolism. In humans, dietary proteins are broken down by digestion into amino acids, which serve as metabolic fuel and other functional roles in the body. Glutamate is the most abundant fast excitatory neurotransmitter in the mammalian nervous system. At chemical synapses, glutamate is stored in vesicles. Nerve impulses trigger release of glutamate from the pre-synaptic cell. In the opposing post-synaptic cell, glutamate receptors, such as the NMDA receptor, bind glutamate and are activated. Because of its role in synaptic plasticity, it is believed that glutamic acid is involved in cognitive functions like learning and memory in the brain.| Glutamate transporters are found in neuronal and glial membranes. They rapidly remove glutamate from the extracellular space. In brain injury or disease, they can work in reverse and excess glutamate can accumulate outside cells. This process causes calcium ions to enter cells via NMDA receptor channels, leading to neuronal damage and eventual cell death, and is called excitotoxicity. The mechanisms of cell death include: (1) damage to mitochondria from excessively high intracellular Ca2+ (2) Glu/Ca2+-mediated promotion of transcription factors for pro-apoptotic genes, or downregulation of transcription factors for anti-apoptotic genes. Excitotoxicity due to glutamate occurs as part of the ischemic cascade and is associated with stroke and diseases like amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, lathyrism, and Alzheimer's disease. Glutamic acid has been implicated in epileptic seizures. Microinjection of glutamic acid into neurons produce spontaneous depolarization around one second apart, and this firing pattern is similar to what is known as paroxysmal depolarizing shift in epileptic attacks. This change in the resting membrane potential at seizure foci could cause spontaneous opening of voltage activated calcium channels, leading to glutamic acid release and further depolarization (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0011745::N-acetyl-L-methionine is nutritionally and metabolically equivalent to L-methionine. Methionine is a dietary indispensable amino acid required for normal growth and development of humans, other mammals, and avian species. In addition to being a substrate for protein synthesis, it is an intermediate in transmethylation reactions, serving as the major methyl group donor in vivo, including the methyl groups for DNA and RNA intermediates. Methionine is a methyl acceptor for 5-methyltetrahydrofolate-homocysteine methyl transferase (methionine synthase), the only reaction that allows for the recycling of this form of folate, and is also a methyl acceptor for the catabolism of betaine. Methionine is also required for synthesis of cysteine. Methionine is accepted as the metabolic precursor for cysteine. Only the sulfur atom from methionine is transferred to cysteine; the carbon skeleton of cysteine is donated by serine. (PMID 16702340  ). The adequacy range of dietary requirements of specific amino acids in disease states is difficult to determine. Requirements may not be similar in disease with regard to protein synthesis. Requirements for this purpose can be assessed only when such a function can be measured and related to clinical outcome.| There is apparent consensus concerning normal sulfur amino acid (SAA) requirements. WHO recommendations amount to 13 mg/kg per 24 h in healthy adults. This amount is roughly doubled in artificial nutrition regimens. In disease or after trauma, requirements may be altered for methionine, cysteine, and taurine. Although in specific cases of congenital enzyme deficiency, prematurity, or diminished liver function, hypermethionemia or hyperhomocysteinemia may occur, SAA supplementation can be considered safe in amounts exceeding 2-3 times the minimal recommended daily intake. Apart from some very specific indications (e.g., acetaminophen poisoning) the usefulness of SAA supplementation is not yet established.(PMID 16702341  ). Methionine is known to exacerbate psychopathological symptoms in schizophrenic patients, there is no evidence of similar effects in healthy subjects. The role of methionine as a precursor of homocysteine is the most notable cause for concern. A "loading dose" of methionine (0.1 g/kg) has been given, and the resultant acute increase in plasma homocysteine has been used as an index of the susceptibility to cardiovascular disease. Although this procedure results in vascular dysfunction, this is acute and unlikely to result in permanent damage. However, a 10-fold larger dose, given mistakenly, resulted in death. Longer-term studies in adults have indicated no adverse consequences of moderate fluctuations in dietary methionine intake, but intakes higher than 5 times normal resulted in elevated homocysteine levels. These effects of methionine on homocysteine and vascular function are moderated by supplements of vitamins B-6, B-12, C, and folic acid. In infants, methionine intakes of 2 to 5 times normal resulted in impaired growth and extremely high plasma methionine levels, but no adverse long-term consequences were observed. (PMID 16702346  ).|
HMDB0011749::2-Piperidinone is a derivative of piperidine which is an organic compound. Piperidine is a colorless fuming liquid with an odor described as ammoniacal, pepper-like, the name comes from the genus name Piper, which is the Latin word for pepper. Piperidine is a widely used building block and chemical reagent in the synthesis of organic compounds, including pharmaceuticals.The piperidine structural motif is present in numerous natural alkaloids. These include piperine, which gives black pepper the hot taste. This gave the compound its name.(Wikipedia).|
HMDB0011756::N-Acetylleucine, also known as N-acetyl-leu or tanganil, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as leucine and derivatives. Leucine and derivatives are compounds containing leucine or a derivative thereof resulting from reaction of leucine at the amino group or the carboxy group, or from the replacement of any hydrogen of glycine by a heteroatom. N-Acetylleucine is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). N-Acetylleucine has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. |
HMDB0011757::N-acetylvaline is a derivative of valine, which is a branched chain essential amino acid. Valine is involved in carbohydrate metabolism. Valine deficiency is marked by neurological defects in the brain. Valine has also been established as a useful supplemental therapy to the ailing liver.|
HMDB0013243::Leucyl-phenylalanine, also known as leu-phe or DL-leu-DL-phe, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as dipeptides. These are organic compounds containing a sequence of exactly two alpha-amino acids joined by a peptide bond. Leucyl-phenylalanine is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Leucyl-phenylalanine has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, urine, and blood. |
HMDB0013302::Phenylalanylphenylalanine (Phe-Phe) is a peptide made of two phenylalanine molecules. Phenylalanine is an essential amino acid and the precursor for the amino acid tyrosine. Like tyrosine, it is the precursor of catecholamines in the body (tyramine, dopamine, epinephrine and norepinephrine). The psychotropic drugs (mescaline, morphine, codeine, and papaverine) also have phenylalanine as a constituent. Phenylalanine is a precursor of the neurotransmitters called catecholamines, which are adrenalin-like substances. Phenylalanine is highly concentrated in the human brain and plasma. The Phe-Phe recognition motif of the Alzheimer's Abeta peptide is the smallest peptide able to assemble into higher -order structures.(PMC:1796831).|
HMDB0013713::N-Acetyltryptophan, also known as ac-try or acetyl-L-TRP, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as n-acyl-l-alpha-amino acids. These are n-acylated alpha amino acids which have the L-configuration of the alpha-carbon atom. N-Acetyltryptophan exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. N-Acetyltryptophan has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. |
HMDB0013716::Norvaline is a non-proteinogenic branched-chain amino acid. It has previously been reported to be a natural component of an antifungal peptide of Bacillus subtilis. Norvaline and other modified branched chain amino acids have received attention in recent studies, as they appear to be incorporated in some recombinant proteins found in E. coli. Norvaline is an amino acid with the chemical formula C5H11NO2, isomeric with valine. This amino acid is often made synthetically.|
HMDB0015166::The prototypical uricosuric agent. It inhibits the renal excretion of organic anions and reduces tubular reabsorption of urate. Probenecid has also been used to treat patients with renal impairment, and, because it reduces the renal tubular excretion of other drugs, has been used as an adjunct to antibacterial therapy. [PubChem]|
HMDB0028680::Alanyl-Alanine is a dipeptide composed of two alanine residues. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028686::Alanyl-Glutamate is a dipeptide composed of alanine and glutamate. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028690::Alanyl-Isoleucine is a dipeptide composed of alanine and isoleucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028694::Alanyl-Phenylalanine is a dipeptide composed of alanine and phenylalanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028695::Alanyl-Proline is a dipeptide composed of alanine and proline. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028700::Alanyl-Valine is a dipeptide composed of alanine and valine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028713::Arginyl-Leucine is a dipeptide composed of arginine and leucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028716::Arginyl-Phenylalanine is a dipeptide composed of arginine and phenylalanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028722::Arginyl-Valine is a dipeptide composed of arginine and valine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028734::Asparaginyl-Isoleucine is a dipeptide composed of asparagine and isoleucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028735::Asparaginyl-Leucine is a dipeptide composed of asparagine and leucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028744::Asparaginyl-Valine is a dipeptide composed of asparagine and valine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028757::Aspartyl-Leucine is a dipeptide composed of aspartate and leucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028822::Glutamylisoleucine is a dipeptide composed of glutamate and isoleucine, and is a proteolytic breakdown product of larger proteins. It belongs to the family of N-acyl-alpha amino acids and derivatives. These are compounds containing an alpha amino acid which bears an acyl group at its terminal nitrogen atom. Glutamylisoleucine is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis.|
HMDB0028823::Glutamylleucine is a dipeptide composed of glutamate and leucine, and is a proteolytic breakdown product of larger proteins. It belongs to the family of N-acyl-alpha amino acids and derivatives. These are compounds containing an alpha amino acid which bears an acyl group at its terminal nitrogen atom. Glutamylleucine is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis.|
HMDB0028844::Glycyl-Isoleucine is a dipeptide composed of glycine and isoleucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028847::Glycyl-Methionine is a dipeptide composed of glycine and methionine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028848::Glycyl-Phenylalanine is a dipeptide composed of glycine and phenylalanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028851::Glycyl-Threonine is a dipeptide composed of glycine and threonine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028852::Glycyl-Tryptophan is a dipeptide composed of glycine and tryptophan. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028853::Glycyltyrosine is a dipeptide composed of glycine and tyrosine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis.|
HMDB0028854::Glycyl-Valine is a dipeptide composed of glycine and valine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028888::Histidinyl-Isoleucine is a dipeptide composed of histidine and isoleucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028889::Histidinyl-Leucine is a dipeptide composed of histidine and leucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028893::Histidinyl-Proline is a dipeptide composed of histidine and proline. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028898::Histidinyl-Valine is a dipeptide composed of histidine and valine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028900::Isoleucyl-Alanine is a dipeptide composed of isoleucine and alanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028901::Isoleucyl-Arginine is a dipeptide composed of isoleucine and arginine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028906::Isoleucyl-Glutamate is a dipeptide composed of isoleucine and glutamate. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028907::Isoleucyl-Glycine is a dipeptide composed of isoleucine and glycine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028910::Isoleucyl-Isoleucine is a dipeptied compoosed of two isoleucine residues. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028911::Isoleucyl-Leucine is a dipeptide composed of isoleucine and leucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028913::Isoleucyl-Methionine is a dipeptide composed of isoleucine and methionine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028914::Isoleucyl-Phenylalanine is a dipeptide composed of isoleucine and phenylalanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028916::Isoleucyl-Serine is a dipeptide composed of isoleucine and serine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028917::Isoleucyl-Threonine is a dipeptide composed of isoleucine and threonine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028918::Isoleucyl-Tryptophan is a dipeptide composed of isoleucine and tryptophan. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028919::Isoleucyl-Tyrosine is a dipeptide composed of isoleucine and tyrosine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028920::Isoleucyl-Valine is a dipeptide composed of isoleucine and valine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028922::Leucyl-Alanine is a dipeptide composed of leucine and alanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028929::Leucyl-Glycine is a dipeptide composed of leucine and glycine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028932::Leucyl-Isoleucine is a dipeptide composed of leucine and isoleucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028935::Leucyl-Methionine is a dipeptide composed of leucine and methionine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028939::Leucyl-Threonine is a dipeptide composed of leucine and threonine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028941::Leucyl-Tyrosine is a dipeptide composed of leucine and tyrosine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028954::Lysyl-Isoleucine is a dipeptide composed of lysine and isoleucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028955::Lysyl-Leucine is a dipeptide composed of lysine and leucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028964::Lysyl-Valine is a dipeptide composed of lysine and valine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028986::Methionyl-Valine is a dipeptide composed of methionine and valine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028988::Phenylalanyl-Alanine is a dipeptide composed of phenylalanine and alanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028991::Phenylalanyl-Aspartate is a dipeptide composed of phenylalanine and aspartate. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028994::Phenylalanyl-Glutamate is a dipeptide composed of phenylalanine and glutamate. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028998::Phenylalanyl-Isoleucine is a dipeptide composed of phenylalanine and isoleucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029004::Phenylalanyl-Serine is a dipeptide composed of phenylalanine and serine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029008::Phenylalanyl-Valine is a dipeptide composed of phenylalanine and valine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029042::Serinyl-Isoleucine is a dipeptide composed of serine and isoleucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029068::Threoninyl-Phenylalanine is a dipeptide composed of threonine and phenylalanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029086::Tryptophyl-Isoleucine is a dipeptide composed of tryptophan and isoleucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029087::Tryptophyl-Leucine is a dipeptide composed of tryptophan and leucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029096::Tryptophyl-Valine is a dipeptide composed of tryptophan and valine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029108::Tyrosyl-Isoleucine is a dipeptide composed of tyrosine and isoleucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029109::Tyrosyl-Leucine is a dipeptide composed of tyrosine and leucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029118::Tyrosyl-Valine is a dipeptide composed of tyrosine and valine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029120::Valyl-Alanine is a dipeptide composed of valine and alanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029126::Valyl-Glutamate is a dipeptide composed of valine and glutamate. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029130::Valyl-Isoleucine is a dipeptide composed of valine and isoleucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029131::Valyl-Leucine is a dipeptide composed of valine and leucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029132::Valyl-Lysine is a dipeptide composed of valine and lysine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029133::Valyl-Methionine is a dipeptide composed of valine and methionine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029134::Valyl-Phenylalanine is a dipeptide composed of valine and phenylalanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029137::Valyl-Threonine is a dipeptide composed of valine and threonine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029139::Valyl-Tyrosine is a dipeptide composed of valine and tyrosine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029140::Valyl-Valine is a dipeptied compoosed of two valine residues. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029377::Piperine, also known as fema 2909, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as alkaloids and derivatives. These are naturally occurring chemical compounds that contain mostly basic nitrogen atoms. This group also includes some related compounds with neutral and even weakly acidic properties. Also some synthetic compounds of similar structure are attributed to alkaloids. In addition to carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen, alkaloids may also contain oxygen, sulfur and more rarely other elements such as chlorine, bromine, and phosphorus. Piperine exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Piperine has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and blood. Within the cell, piperine is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). Piperine can be biosynthesized from (e,e)-piperic acid. Outside of the human body, piperine can be found in herbs and spices and pepper (spice). This makes piperine a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0029723::Saccharin, ammonium salt is used as a food additive [EAFUS] (EAFUS: Everything Added to Food in the United States). Saccharin belongs to the family of aromatic homomonocyclic compounds. These are aromatic compounds containing only one ring, which is homocyclic.|
HMDB0029942::D-Arabinose, also known as (+/-)-arabinose or aloe sugar, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as pentoses. These are monosaccharides in which the carbohydrate moiety contains five carbon atoms. D-Arabinose is soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). D-Arabinose has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, D-arabinose is primarily located in the cytoplasm. D-Arabinose exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Outside of the human body, D-arabinose can be found in sweet basil and tamarind. This makes D-arabinose a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0031057::2-Hydroxyhexadecanoic acid, also known as 2-hydroxypalmitic acid, is a member of the class of compounds known as long-chain fatty acids. Long-chain fatty acids are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 13 and 21 carbon atoms. The chain of 2-hydroxyhexadecanoic acid bears a hydroxyl group. 2-Hydroxyhexadecanoic acid is practically insoluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). (R)-2-Hydroxyhexadecanoic acid occurs in wool fat, which is used as a chewing gum softener.|
HMDB0031193::1,2,3-Propanetricarboxylic acid is found in corn. 1,2,3-Propanetricarboxylic acid is isolated from plants e.g. sugarbeet sap, sap of Acer saccharinum (maple syrup). Propane-1,2,3-tricarboxylic acid, also known as tricarballylic acid, carballylic acid, and beta-carboxyglutaric acid, is a tricarboxylic acid that has three carboxylic acid functional groups. The compound is an inhibitor of the enzyme aconitase and interferes with the Krebs cycle. (Wikipedia|
HMDB0031554::Sucralose is a noncalorific sweetener with good taste properties One report suggests sucralose is a possible trigger for some migraine patients. Another study published in the Journal of Mutation Research linked doses of sucralose equivalent to 11,450 packets per day in a person to DNA damage in mice. Results from over 100 animal and clinical studies in the FDA approval process unanimously indicated a lack of risk associated with sucralose intake. However, some adverse effects were seen at doses that significantly exceeded the estimated daily intake (EDI), which is 1.1 mg/kg/day. When the EDI is compared to the intake at which adverse effects are seen, known as the highest no adverse effects limit (HNEL), at 1500 mg/kg/day, there is a large margin of safety. The bulk of sucralose ingested is not absorbed by the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and is directly excreted in the feces, while 11-27% of it is absorbed. The amount that is absorbed from the GI tract is largely removed from the blood stream by the kidneys and eliminated in the urine with 20-30% of the absorbed sucralose being metabolized.| Sucralose belongs to a class of compounds known as organochlorides (or chlorocarbons). Some organochlorides, particularly those that accumulate in fatty tissues, are toxic to plants or animals, including humans. Sucralose, however, is not known to be toxic in small quantities and is extremely insoluble in fat; it cannot accumulate in fat like chlorinated hydrocarbons. In addition, sucralose does not break down or dechlorinate. Sucralose can be found in more than 4,500 food and beverage products. It is used because it is a no-calorie sweetener, does not promote dental caries, and is safe for consumption by diabetics. Sucralose is used as a replacement for, or in combination with, other artificial or natural sweeteners such as aspartame, acesulfame potassium or high-fructose corn syrup. Sucralose is used in products such as candy, breakfast bars and soft drinks. It is also used in canned fruits wherein water and sucralose take the place of much higher calorie corn syrup based additives. Sucralose mixed with maltodextrin or dextrose (both made from corn) as bulking agents is sold internationally by McNeil Nutritionals under the Splenda brand name. In the United States and Canada, this blend is increasingly found in restaurants, including McDonald's, Tim Hortons and Starbucks, in yellow packets, in contrast to the blue packets commonly used by aspartame and the pink packets used by those containing saccharin sweeteners; though in Canada yellow packets are also associated with the SugarTwin brand of cyclamate sweetener.| Sucralose is a highly heat-stable artificial sweetener, allowing it to be used in many recipes with little or no sugar. Sucralose is available in a granulated form that allows for same-volume substitution with sugar. This mix of granulated sucralose includes fillers, all of which rapidly dissolve in liquids.[citation needed] Unlike sucrose which dissolves to a clear state, sucralose suspension in clear liquids such as water results in a cloudy state. For example, gelatin and fruit preserves made with sucrose have a satiny, near jewel-like appearance, whereas the same products made with sucralose (whether cooked or not) appear translucent and marginally glistening.[citation needed] While the granulated sucralose provides apparent volume-for-volume sweetness, the texture in baked products may be noticeably different. Sucralose is non-hygroscopic, meaning it does not attract moisture, which can lead to baked goods that are noticeably drier and manifesting a less dense texture than baked products made with sucrose. Unlike sucrose which melts when baked at high temperatures, sucralose maintains its granular structure when subjected to dry, high heat (e.g., in a 350 ¬¨?F (177 ¬¨?C) oven). Thus, in some baking recipes, such as burnt cream, which require sugar sprinkled on top to partially or fully melt and crystallize, substituting sucralose will not result in the same surface texture, crispness, or crystalline structure.| Sucralose is a zero-calorie sugar substitute artificial sweetener. In the European Union, it is also known under the E number (additive code) E955. Sucralose is approximately 600 times as sweet as sucrose (table sugar), twice as sweet as saccharin, and 3.3 times as sweet as aspartame. Unlike aspartame, it is stable under heat and over a broad range of pH conditions. Therefore, it can be used in baking or in products that require a longer shelf life. The commercial success of sucralose-based products stems from its favorable comparison to other low-calorie sweeteners in terms of taste, stability, and safety|
HMDB0032985::5-(2-Hydroxyethyl)-4-methylthiazole is found in alcoholic beverages. 5-(2-Hydroxyethyl)-4-methylthiazole is a flavour ingredient. 5-(2-Hydroxyethyl)-4-methylthiazole is present in cooked beef, beer, spirits, cocoa, roast peanut, porcini (Boletus edulis) and malt.|
HMDB0033433::(S)-Homostachydrine (also known as pipecolic acid betaine or homostachydrine) can be found in green coffee beans of Robusta and Arabica species (PMID: 27006213  ). (S)-Homostachydrine content is unaffected by coffee bean roasting treatment because of its remarkable heat stability. This makes it a good candidate marker for determining the content of Robusta and Arabica species in roasted coffee blends. (S)-Homostachydrine is also a potential marker of coffee consumption as it can be found in both human serum and human urine. It is also found in alfalfa seeds and leaves. More specifically, (S)-homostachydrine can be isolated from the seeds of Medicago sativa (alfalfa) as well as from Achillea millefolium (yarrow). (S)-Homostachydrine is also found in the fruits, seeds, and leaves of orange, lemon, and bergamot (PMID: 22208890  ).|
HMDB0034252::2-Aminoheptanedioic acid, also known as alpha-aminopimelic acid or a-aminopimelate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as alpha amino acids. These are amino acids in which the amino group is attached to the carbon atom immediately adjacent to the carboxylate group (alpha carbon). 2-Aminoheptanedioic acid is soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). 2-Aminoheptanedioic acid has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, 2-aminoheptanedioic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Outside of the human body, 2-aminoheptanedioic acid can be found in beverages and fruits. This makes 2-aminoheptanedioic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0034301::Piperidine is found in barley. Piperidine is present in black pepper (Piper nigrum). Piperidine is a flavouring agent Piperidine (Azinane after the Hantzsch Widman nomenclature) is an organic compound with the molecular formula (CH2)5NH. This heterocyclic amine consists of a six-membered ring containing five methylene units and one nitrogen atom. It is a colorless fuming liquid with an odor described as ammoniacal, pepper-like; the name comes from the genus name Piper, which is the Latin word for pepper. Piperidine is a widely used building block and chemical reagent in the synthesis of organic compounds, including pharmaceuticals. Piperidine is a widely used secondary amine. It is widely used to convert ketones to enamines. Enamines derived from piperidine can be used in the Stork enamine alkylation reaction. Piperidine is used as a solvent and as a base. The same is true for certain derivatives: N-formylpiperidine is a polar aprotic solvent with better hydrocarbon solubility than other amide solvents, and 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine is highly sterically hindered base, useful because of its low nucleophilicity and high solubility in organic solvents|
HMDB0036323::Secoisolariciresinol 9,9'-diglucoside, also known as SDG or BMHB-diglc, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as lignan glycosides. These are aromatic polycyclic compounds containing a carbohydrate component glycosidically linked to a lignan moiety. They include 1-aryltetralin lactones. Secoisolariciresinol 9,9'-diglucoside is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Secoisolariciresinol 9,9'-diglucoside has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, secoisolariciresinol 9,9'-diglucoside is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Outside of the human body, secoisolariciresinol 9,9'-diglucoside can be found in coffee and coffee products, fats and oils, flaxseed, and tea. This makes secoisolariciresinol 9,9'-diglucoside a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0037396::Rosilic acid, also known as rosilate or 18:0(10-OH), belongs to the class of organic compounds known as long-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 13 and 21 carbon atoms. Rosilic acid is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Rosilic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, rosilic acid is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP), cytoplasm and adiposome. Outside of the human body, rosilic acid can be found in herbs and spices. This makes rosilic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product.|
HMDB0059911::Paracetamol sulfate, also known as paracetamol sulfuric acid or 4-acetaminophen sulfate, is classified as a phenylsulfate. Phenylsulfates are compounds containing a sulfuric acid group conjugated to a phenyl group. Paracetamol sulfate is considered a slightly soluble (in water), acidic compound. Paracetamol sulfate is a metabolite of paracetamol, a common drug used for the relief of pain as an antipyretic. After paracetamol is absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract, it forms paracetamol sulfate by conjugation with sulfuric acid. Paracetamol sulfate can be found in both plasma and urine (PMID: 15127815  ).|
HMDB0060015::Phenol sulphate, also known as phenylsulfate or aryl sulphate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenylsulfates. Phenylsulfates are compounds containing a sulfuric acid group conjugated to a phenyl group. Phenol sulphate is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely strong acidic compound (based on its pKa). Phenol sulphate has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, phenol sulphate is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Adenosine 3',5'-diphosphate and phenol sulphate can be biosynthesized from phosphoadenosine phosphosulfate and phenol through the action of the enzyme sulfotransferase 1A1. In humans, phenol sulphate is involved in the sulfate/sulfite metabolism pathway. Phenol sulphate is also involved in the metabolic disorder called sulfite oxidase deficiency.|
HMDB0060256::L-Xylonate, also known as L-xylonic acid, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as sugar acids and derivatives. Sugar acids and derivatives are compounds containing a saccharide unit which bears a carboxylic acid group. L-Xylonate is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). L-Xylonate has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine, feces, and saliva. L-Xylonate can be converted into L-xylono-1,4-lactone. |
HMDB0060493::N-Acetylmuramate, also known as acetylmuramic acid or 4-O-nacmur, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as acylaminosugars. These are organic compounds containing a sugar linked to a chain through N-acyl group. N-Acetylmuramate is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). N-Acetylmuramate has been primarily detected in feces. N-Acetylmuramate can be biosynthesized from 2-amino-3-O-[(R)-1-carboxyethyl]-2-deoxy-D-glucopyranose. |
HMDB0061112::3-Carboxy-4-methyl-5-propyl-2-furanpropionic acid (CMPF) is also called 3-carboxy-4-methyl-5-propyl-2-furanpropanoic acid and 2-(2-carboxyethyl)-4-methyl-4-propylfuran-3-carboxylic acid. CMPF is significantly accumulated in the serum of chronic kidney disease patients and is considered to be a potent uremic toxin (PMID: 8734460  ). There are several minor derivatives of CMPF that have been detected in serum and urine including 3-carboxy-4-methyl-5-pentyl-2-furanpropionic acid, 3-carboxy-4-methyl-5-ethyl-2-furanpropionic acid, and 3-carboxy-5-propyl-2-furanpropionic acid. CMPF was first detected in human urine in 1979 (PMID: 12388676  ) and it is believed to be formed from the consumption of fish, vegetables, and fruits (PMID: 19083276  ; PMID: 12388676  ). CMPF is a strong inhibitor of mitochondrial respiration and is associated with thyroid dysfunction (PMID: 19083276  ).  CMPF also directly inhibits renal secretion of various drugs and endogenous organic acids by competitively inhibiting OAT3 transporters (PMID: 11967025  ).  It is also thought to contribute to various neurological abnormalities because it inhibits the transport of organic acids at the blood-brain barrier (PMID: 12388676  ).|
HMDB0061115::Lenticin or hypaphorine is a compound found in lentil extracts.  It can also be detected in blood after an individual has consumed lentils and may therefore serve as a food biomarker. Lenticin is an indole alkaloid that is essentially an N-methylated form of tryptophan.  It is known to be a sleep-inducing compound (PMID: 18571406  ).  In plants it is an agonist of the plant hormone indole acetic acid.|
HMDB0061684::N-Acetylisoleucine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as isoleucine and derivatives. Isoleucine and derivatives are compounds containing isoleucine or a derivative thereof resulting from reaction of isoleucine at the amino group or the carboxy group, or from the replacement of any hydrogen of glycine by a heteroatom. N-Acetylisoleucine is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). N-Acetylisoleucine has been primarily detected in feces. |
HMDB0061696::1-Stearoylglycerophosphoinositol belongs to the family of glycerophosphoinositols, which are lipids containing a common glycerophosphate skeleton linked to at least one fatty acyl chain and an inositol moiety. Their general formula is O[C@H]1[C@H](O)[C@@H](O)[C@H](OP(O)(=O)OC[C@@H](CO(R1))O(R2))[C@H](O)[C@@H]1O, where R1-R2 are fatty acid chains PI(18:0/0:0) is made up of one octadecanoyl(R1).|
HMDB0061697::1-Stearoylglycerophosphoglycerol is a phosphatidylglycerol. It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylserine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, phosphatidylserines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. PG(18:0/0:0), in particular, consists of two octadecanoyl chains at positions C-1 and C-2. In E. coli glycerophospholipid metabolism, phosphatidylglycerol is formed from phosphatidic acid (1,2-diacyl-sn-glycerol 3-phosphate) by a sequence of enzymatic reactions that proceeds via two intermediates, cytidine diphosphate diacylglycerol (CDP-diacylglycerol) and phosphatidylglycerophosphate (PGP, a phosphorylated phosphatidylglycerol). Phosphatidylglycerols, along with CDP-diacylglycerol, also serve as precursor molecules for the synthesis of cardiolipin, a phospholipid found in membranes.|
HMDB0061702::2-Palmitoylglycerophosphocholine belongs to the family of glycerophosphocholines, which are lipids containing a common glycerophosphate skeleton linked to at least one fatty acyl chain, and a choline moiety. Their general formula is C[N+](C)(C)CCOP(O)(=O)OCC(CO(R1))O(R2), where R1-R2 are fatty acid chains PC(0:0/16:0) is made up of one hexadecanoyl(R2).|
HMDB0061707::13-Methylmyristic acid (CAS# 2485-71-4), also known as 13-methyltetradecanoic acid, iso-pentadecanoic acid, 13-methyltetradecanoic acid, 13-MTD, or 13-MTDA, is an iso-fatty acid. It is used to study the induction of mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis via the AKT and MAPK pathways. 13-MTDA is used for the biosynthesis of methyl-branched polyhydroxyalkanoates|
HMDB0061709::15-Methylpalmitate, also known as 15-methylhexadecanoate, is a fatty acid methyl ester (FAME). It has an exact mass of 269.25 g/mol and the molecular formula is C17H33O2. Methylpalmitate is a biomarker for the consumption of butte|
HMDB0061710::17-Methylstearate, also known as 17-Methylstearic acid (CAS 2724-59-6), is a medium-chain saturated iso-fatty acid that may be used as a reference in the analysis of iso-fatty acids found in lipids and triglycerides|
HMDB0061711::Methylphosphate, also known as Methyl dihydrogen phosphate, O-Methyl phosphate, Monomethyl phosphate, Dihydrogen methyl phosphate, or Monomethyl dihydrogen phosphate, is a methyl ester of phosphoric acid. It is a colourless, nonvolatile liquid. It has some specialized uses in the production of other compounds|
HMDB0061714::Docosadienoate (22:2n6), also known as 13,16-docosadienoic acid, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as very long-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains at least 22 carbon atoms. Docosadienoate (22:2n6) is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Docosadienoate (22:2n6) has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, blood, and urine. Within the cell, docosadienoate (22:2n6) is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP), cytoplasm and adiposome.|
HMDB0061822::Hexaethylene glycol, also known as hexagol or peg-6, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as polyethylene glycols. These are oligomers or polymers of ethylene oxide, with the general formula (C2H4O)n (with n>=3). Hexaethylene glycol is slightly soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Hexaethylene glycol has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Hexaethylene glycol is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, hexaethylene glycol monomethyl ether, formylmethyl hexaethylene glycol, and hexaethylene glycol monophosphate. |
HMDB0061835::Heptaethylene glycol belongs to the class of organic compounds known as polyethylene glycols. These are oligomers or polymers of ethylene oxide, with the general formula (C2H4O)n (with n>=3). Heptaethylene glycol is slightly soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Heptaethylene glycol has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. |
HMDB0061918::1,3-Dihydro-(2H)-indol-2-one belongs to the class of organic compounds known as indolines. These are compounds containing an indole moiety, which consists of pyrrolidine ring fused to benzene  to form 2,3-dihydroindole.|
HMDB0062436::9Z-Eicosenoic acid, also known as gadoleic acid, is a member of the class of compounds known as long-chain fatty acids. Long-chain fatty acids are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 13 and 21 carbon atoms. 9Z-Eicosenoic acid is practically insoluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 9Z-Eicosenoic acid can be found in a number of food items such as lemon, sugar, garlic, and mung bean, which makes 9Z-eicosenoic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. 9Z-Eicosenoic acid can be found in feces, blood, and urine.|
HMDB0062541::1-palmitoylglycerophosphocholine is classified as a member of the 1-acyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholines. 1-acyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholines are glycerophosphocholines in which the glycerol is esterified with a fatty acid at O-1 position, and linked at position 3 to a phosphocholine. 1-palmitoylglycerophosphocholine is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and acidic|
HMDB0062549::2-Hydroxystearic acid, also known as 2-hydroxystearate or 2-hydroxyoctadecanoic acid, is a member of the class of compounds known as long-chain fatty acids. Long-chain fatty acids are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 13 and 21 carbon atoms. The chain of 2-hydroxystearic acid bears a hydroxyl group. 2-Hydroxystearic acid is practically insoluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 2-Hydroxystearic acid can be found in feces. 2-Hydroxystearic acid can be synthesized from octadecanoic acid, and can be synthesized into 2-hydroxystearoyl-CoA and N-2-hydroxystearoylsphingosine.|
HMDB0028831::Glutamyltyrosine is a dipeptide composed of glutamate and tyrosine, and is a proteolytic breakdown product of larger proteins. It belongs to the family of N-acyl-alpha amino acids and derivatives. These are compounds containing an alpha amino acid which bears an acyl group at its terminal nitrogen atom. Glutamyltyrosine is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis.|
HMDB0062557::N-Acetylthreonine, also known as ammonium N-acetyl-L-threoninate, is classified as a member of the N-acyl-L-alpha-amino acids. These compounds are N-acylated alpha amino acids which have the L-configuration at the alpha-carbon atom. N-Acetylthreonine is considered to be soluble (in water) and acidic.|
HMDB0006528::Docosapentaenoic acid (22n-3) (also known as clupanodonic acid) is an essential omega-3 fatty acid (EFA) which is prevalent in fish oils. Docosapentaenoic acid, commonly called DPA, is an intermediary between eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA, 20:5 ω-3) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA, 22:6 ω-3). Seal oil is a rich source of this metabolite. There are three functions of docosapentaenoic acid. Most importantly, it is a component of phospholipids found in all animal cell membranes, and a deficiency of docosapentaenoic acid leads to faulty membranes being formed. Secondly, it is involved in the transport and oxidation of cholesterol, and clupanodonic acid tends to lower plasma cholesterol. A third function is as a precursor of prostanoids which are only formed from docosapentaenoic acid. Deficiency of this in experimental animals causes lesions mainly attributable to faulty cellular membranes. Outcomes include sudden failure of growth, lesions of the skin, kidney, and connective tissue, erythrocyte fragility, impaired fertility, and the uncoupling of oxidation and phosphorylation. In humans, pure deficiency of docosapentaenoic acid has been studied particularly in persons fed intravenously. A relative deficiency (that is, a low ratio in the body of docosapentaenoic to long-chain saturated fatty acids and isomers of docosapentaenoate) is common in Western diets and plays an important part in the causation of atherosclerosis, coronary thrombosis, multiple sclerosis, the triopathy of diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and certain forms of malignant disease. Various factors affect the dietary requirement of docosapentaenoic acid (PMID: 6469703  ).|
HMDB0011152::1-(1Z-hexadecenyl)-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine is an phospho-ether lipid. Ether lipids are lipids in which one or more of the carbon atoms on glycerol is bonded to an alkyl chain via an ether linkage, as opposed to the usual ester linkage. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PEs are neutral zwitterions at physiological pH. They mostly have palmitic or stearic acid on carbon 1 and a long chain unsaturated fatty acid (e.g. 18:2, 20:4 and 22:6) on carbon 2. PE synthesis can occur via two pathways. The first requires that ethanolamine be activated by phosphorylation and then coupled to CDP. The ethanolamine is then transferred from CDP-ethanolamine to phosphatidic acid to yield PE. The second involves the decarboxylation of PS. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens.| Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0029046::Serinyl-Phenylalanine is a dipeptide composed of serine and phenylalanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029064::Threoninyl-Isoleucine is a dipeptide composed of threonine and isoleucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029065::Threoninyl-Leucine is a dipeptide composed of threonine and leucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029074::Threoninyl-Valine is a dipeptide composed of threonine and valine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0062121::Dihydroferulic acid, also known as 3-(4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenyl)propionic acid or dihydroconiferylate, is classified as a member of the phenylpropanoic acids. Phenylpropanoic acids are compounds with a structure containing a benzene ring conjugated to a propanoic acid. Dihydroferulic acid is considered to be slightly soluble (in water) and acidic. (ChemoSummarizer)|
HMDB0094646::2-pentanamido-3-phenylpropanoic acid is classified as a phenylalanine or a Phenylalanine derivative. Phenylalanines are compounds containing phenylalanine or a derivative thereof resulting from reaction of phenylalanine at the amino group or the carboxy group, or from the replacement of any hydrogen of glycine by a heteroatom. 2-pentanamido-3-phenylpropanoic acid is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. 2-pentanamido-3-phenylpropanoic acid can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094648::Leu-leu-leu, also known as Leucyl-leucyl-leucine or Trileucine, is classified as a member of the oligopeptides. Oligopeptides are organic compounds containing a sequence of between three and ten alpha-amino acids joined by peptide bonds. Leu-leu-leu is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. Leu-leu-leu can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094649::2-aminoheptanoate, also known as alpha-Aminoenanthic acid or a-Aminoenanthate, is classified as a member of the alpha amino acids. Alpha amino acids are amino acids in which the amino group is attached to the carbon atom immediately adjacent to the carboxylate group (alpha carbon). 2-aminoheptanoate is considered to be a soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound. 2-aminoheptanoate is a fatty acid lipid molecule. 2-aminoheptanoate can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094650::5alpha-pregnan-3beta,20alpha-diol disulfate, also known as 5a-Pregnan-3b,20a-diol disulfuric acid or 5α-pregnan-3β,20α-diol disulfate, is classified as a member of the 2,4,5-trisubstituted thiazoles. 2,4,5-trisubstituted thiazoles are compounds containing a thiazole ring substituted at positions 2, 4 and 5 only. 5alpha-pregnan-3beta,20alpha-diol disulfate is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a very weak acidic compound. 5alpha-pregnan-3beta,20alpha-diol disulfate can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094651::Pyroglutamylvaline, also known as pyro-Glu-Val or 5-oxoprolylvaline, is classified as a member of the dipeptides. Dipeptides are organic compounds containing a sequence of exactly two alpha-amino acids joined by a peptide bond. Pyroglutamylvaline is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and acidic.|
HMDB0094656::2-hydroxydecanoate, also known as alpha-Hydroxycaprate or a-Hydroxycapric acid, is classified as a member of the medium-chain fatty acids. Medium-chain fatty acids are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 4 and 12 carbon atoms. 2-hydroxydecanoate is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. 2-hydroxydecanoate can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094657::2-oxindole-3-acetate, also known as 2-Indolinone-3-acetic acid, is classified as an indolyl carboxylic acid or an Indolyl carboxylic acid derivative. Indolyl carboxylic acids are compounds containing a carboxylic acid chain (of at least 2 carbon atoms) linked to an indole ring. 2-oxindole-3-acetate is considered to be a slightly soluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. 2-oxindole-3-acetate can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094672::3-hydroxymyristate, also known as 3-Hydroxytetradecanoate(1-) or β-hydroxymyristic acid, is classified as a member of the long-chain fatty acids. Long-chain fatty acids are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 13 and 21 carbon atoms. 3-hydroxymyristate is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. 3-hydroxymyristate can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094673::Cyclo(leu-phe), also known as cyclo(Phe-leu) or cFL, is classified as an alpha amino acid or an Alpha amino acid derivative. Alpha amino acids are amino acids in which the amino group is attached to the carbon atom immediately adjacent to the carboxylate group (alpha carbon), or a derivative thereof. Cyclo(leu-phe) is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound. Cyclo(leu-phe) can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094676::Val-val-val is classified as a member of the oligopeptides. Oligopeptides are organic compounds containing a sequence of between three and ten alpha-amino acids joined by peptide bonds. Val-val-val is considered to be a slightly soluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. Val-val-val can be found in feces.|
HMDB0028830::Glutamyltryptophan is a dipeptide composed of glutamate and tryptophan, and is a proteolytic breakdown product of larger proteins. It belongs to the family of N-acyl-alpha amino acids and derivatives. These are compounds containing an alpha amino acid which bears an acyl group at its terminal nitrogen atom. Glutamyltryptophan is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. Glutamyltryptophan can be found in feces (PMID: 27015276  ). The synthetic version of this dipeptide is named Oglufanide. It was originally developed to treat severe infectious disease in Russia (where it is a registered pharmaceutical), and was extensively studied in cancer clinical trials in the United States before being acquired by Implicit Bioscience in 2005. Oglufanide works as a regulator of the body's immune response and is being given by intranasal administration to patients with chronic hepatitis C viral infection (DB05779).|
HMDB0094680::Octaethylene glycol, also known as 3,6,9,12,15,18,21-heptaoxatricosane-1,23-diol, is classified as a member of the polyethylene glycols. Polyethylene glycols are oligomers or polymers of ethylene oxide, with the general formula (C2H4O)n (with n>=3). Octaethylene glycol is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. (ChemoSummarizer)<U+00A0>|
HMDB0094682::5alpha-androstan-3alpha,17beta-diol disulfate, also known as 5α-androstan-3α,17β-diol disulfuric acid, is classified as a member of the sulfated steroids. Sulfated steroids are sterol lipids containing a sulfate group attached to the steroid skeleton. 5alpha-androstan-3alpha,17beta-diol disulfate is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and an extremely strong acidic compound. 5alpha-androstan-3alpha,17beta-diol disulfate can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094684::Monooleoylglycerol, also known as glyceryl 1-oleate, glycerylmonooleate or 1-monoolein, is classified as a member of the 1-monoacylglycerols. 1-Monoacylglycerols are monoacylglycerols containing a glycerol acylated at the 1-position. Monooleoylglycerol is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral.<U+00A0> Monooleoylglycerol is a monoradylglycerol lipid molecule. (ChemoSummarizer)|
HMDB0094688::1-stearoylglycerophosphocholine is classified as a member of the glycerophospholipids. Glycerophospholipids are derivatives of glycerophosphoric acid that contains at least one O-acyl, or O-alkyl, or O-(1-alkenyl) group attached to the glycerol residue. 1-stearoylglycerophosphocholine can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094693::3-aminobutyrate is classified as a beta amino acid or a Beta amino acid derivative. Beta amino acids are amino acids having a (-NH2) group attached to the beta carbon atom. 3-aminobutyrate is considered to be a soluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. 3-aminobutyrate can be found in feces.|
HMDB0094696::N-Methyl proline, also known as N-methyl-L-proline, (2S)-1-methylpyrrolidine-2-carboxylic acid or monomethyl proline, is classified as a proline or a proline derivative. Prolines are compounds containing proline or a derivative thereof resulting from reaction of proline at the amino group or the carboxy group, or from the replacement of any hydrogen of glycine by a heteroatom. N-Methyl-L-proline is considered to be soluble (in water) and acidic. (ChemoSummarizer)|
HMDB0094701::N-Acetylproline, also known as (2S)-1-acetylpyrrolidine-2-carboxylic acid, is classified as a proline or a proline derivative. Prolines are compounds containing proline or a derivative thereof resulting from a reaction of proline at the amino group or the carboxy group, or from the replacement of any hydrogen of glycine by a heteroatom. N-Acetylproline is considered to be soluble (in water) and acidic.|
HMDB0094704::N-propionylmethionine is classified as a methionine or a Methionine derivative. Methionines are compounds containing methionine or a derivative thereof resulting from reaction of methionine at the amino group or the carboxy group, or from the replacement of any hydrogen of glycine by a heteroatom. N-propionylmethionine is considered to be a slightly soluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. N-propionylmethionine can be found in feces.|
HMDB0029052::Serinyl-Valine is a dipeptide composed of serine and valine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0094710::3-[3-(sulfooxy)phenyl]propanoic acid, also known as 3-(3-Hydroxyphenyl)propanoate sulfate or Mhppa sulfate, is classified as a member of the phenylsulfates. Phenylsulfates are compounds containing a sulfuric acid group conjugated to a phenyl group. 3-[3-(sulfooxy)phenyl]propanoic acid is considered to be a slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely strong acidic compound. 3-[3-(sulfooxy)phenyl]propanoic acid can be found in feces.|
HMDB0029043::Serinyl-Leucine is a dipeptide composed of serine and leucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0094708::Tetraethylene glycol, also known as 2,2’-[oxybis(2,1-ethanediyloxy)]bisethanol or 3,6,9-trioxaundecan-1,11-diol, is classified as a member of the polyethylene glycols. It is an industrial solvent/chemical with a higher boiling point and lower volatility than the lower ethylene glycols. It is especially useful in polyester resins and as a plasticizer. Tetraethylene glycol is also used as a chemical intermediate and as a solvent in the production of inks and dyes. It is often used as a process solvent in hydrocarbon purification processes and as a coupling agent in the production of textile lubricants and formulations. Tetraethylene glycol is a non-carcinogenic (not listed by IARC) potentially toxic compound. (ChemoSummarizer)|
HMDB0002327::Undecanedicarboxylic acid is an unusual odd-numbered dicarboxylic acid that appears in the urines of children with neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy and Zellweger syndrome, as an additional marker of these peroxisomal disorders. (PMID: 2943344  ).|
HMDB0011131::MG(18:0/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups: 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well. MG(18:0/0:0/0:0), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position. MG(18:0/0:0/0:0 is used as a food additive (EAFUS: Everything Added to Food in the United States).|
HMDB0060038::10Z-Heptadecenoic acid is a monounsaturated fatty acid with an unsaturated double bond at the 10th carbon. Heptadecanoic acid, or margaric acid, is a saturated fatty acid. Its molecular formula is CH3(CH2)15COOH. It occurs as a trace component of the fat and milkfat of ruminants, but it does not occur in any natural animal or vegetable fat at concentrations over half a percent. Salts and esters of heptadecanoic acid are called heptadecanoates.|
HMDB0031072::Isomyristic acid, also known as aseanostatin P1 or i14:0, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as long-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 13 and 21 carbon atoms. Isomyristic acid exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Isomyristic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, isomyristic acid is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP), cytoplasm and adiposome. Isomyristic acid can be converted into isomyristoyl-CoA. Outside of the human body, isomyristic acid can be found in fishes. This makes isomyristic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product.|
HMDB0002261::2-Hydroxymyristic acid is an analog of myristic acid that becomes metabolically activated in cells to form 2-hydroxymyristoyl-CoA, a potent inhibitor of myristoyl-CoA:protein N-myristoyltransferase, the enzyme that catalyzes protein N-myristoylation. Treatment of T cells with 2-hydroxymyristic acid inhibits the myristoylation and alters the stability of p56lck. (PMID 8103677  ).|
HMDB0035514::xi-2,3-Dihydro-2-oxo-1H-indole-3-acetic acid is found in brassicas. xi-2,3-Dihydro-2-oxo-1H-indole-3-acetic acid is isolated from Ribes rubrum (currant), Brassica species and Helianthus annuus (sunflower). xi-2,3-Dihydro-2-oxo-1H-indole-3-acetic acid is a product of catabolism of 1H-Indole-3-acetic acid BNC14-M in Zea mays (sweetcorn|
HMDB0033752::3-(2-Hydroxyphenyl)propanoic acid, also known as melilotic acid or melilotate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenylpropanoic acids. Phenylpropanoic acids are compounds with a structure containing a benzene ring conjugated to a propanoic acid. 3-(2-Hydroxyphenyl)propanoic acid exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 3-(2-Hydroxyphenyl)propanoic acid has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, 3-(2-hydroxyphenyl)propanoic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm. 3-(2-Hydroxyphenyl)propanoic acid can be biosynthesized from propionic acid. Outside of the human body, 3-(2-hydroxyphenyl)propanoic acid can be found in a number of food items such as herbs and spices, red beetroot, chinese cinnamon, and bilberry. This makes 3-(2-hydroxyphenyl)propanoic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0003464::4-Guanidinobutanoate is a normal metabolite present in low concentrations. Patients with hyperargininemia have an arginase deficiency which leads to blockade of the urea cycle in the last step with several clinical symptoms. Owing to the arginase deficiency this patients accumulate arginine which leads eventually to epileptogenic guanidino compounds (PMID 7752905  ).|
HMDB0000500::4-Hydroxybenzoic acid, or p-hydroxybenzoic acid, is a phenolic derivative of benzoic acid. It a white crystalline solid that is slightly soluble in water and chloroform, but well soluble in alcohols, ether, and acetone.|
HMDB0002035::trans-4-Coumaric acid, also known as 4-hydroxycinnamic acid or p-coumaric acid, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as hydroxycinnamic acids. Hydroxycinnamic acids are compounds containing an cinnamic acid where the benzene ring is hydroxylated. trans-4-Coumaric acid exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). trans-4-Coumaric acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, urine, and blood. Within the cell, trans-4-coumaric acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and mitochondria. trans-4-Coumaric acid exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Outside of the human body, trans-4-coumaric acid can be found in a number of food items such as sweet bay, green bell pepper, apricot, and half-highbush blueberry. This makes trans-4-coumaric acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0000076::Dihydrouracil is an intermediate breakdown product of uracil. Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DHP) catalyzes the reduction of uracil into 5,6-dihydrouracil then dihydropyrimidinase hydrolyzes 5,6-dihydrouracil into N-carbamyl-beta-alanine. Finally, beta-ureidopropionase catalyzes the conversion of N-carbamyl-beta-alanine into beta-alanine. When present at abnormally high levels, dihydrouracil can be toxic although the mechanism of toxicity is not clear. In particular, patients with dihydropyrimidinase deficiency exhibit highly increased concentrations of 5,6-dihydrouracil and 5,6-dihydrothymine, and moderately increased concentrations of uracil and thymine can be detected in urine. Dihydropyrimidinase deficiency is a disorder that can cause neurological and gastrointestinal problems in some affected individuals (OMIM: 222748  ).  The neurological abnormalities that occur most often in people with dihydropyrimidinase deficiency are intellectual disability, seizures, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), an abnormally small head size (microcephaly), and autistic behaviours that affect communication and social interaction. Gastrointestinal problems that occur in dihydropyrimidinase deficiency include backflow of acidic stomach contents into the esophagus (gastroesophageal reflux) and recurrent episodes of vomiting. The direct measurement of the activity of DHP in patients has been hampered by the fact that the enzyme is expressed almost exclusively in liver tissue.|
HMDB0000529::5Z-Dodecenoic acid, also known as 5-dodecenoic acid or 5-dodecenoate, is a monounsaturated fatty acid that has a C12 chain as a backbone and a cis double bond at the C5 position. 5-Dodecenoic acid is a member of the class of compounds known as medium-chain fatty acids. Medium-chain fatty acids are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 4 and 12 carbon atoms. Thus, 5-dodecenoic acid is considered to be a fatty acid lipid molecule. 5-Dodecenoic acid is practically insoluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Within the cell, 5-dodecenoic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and in the membrane (predicted from logP). It can also be found in the extracellular space. An increase of 5-dodecenoic acid in plasma is associated with acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency disorders (PMID: 7586519  ). 5-Dodecenoic acid is an intermediate of unsaturated fatty acid oxidation.|
HMDB0000453::D-Hexanolactone is the lactone of 5-hydroxy-Hexanoic acid. Lactones are internal esters that exist in equilibrium between their closed (lactone) and open (hydroxy acid) forms in an aqueous environment. The lactone/hydroxy acid ratio at equilibrium is pH-dependent, with the closed form being favored at lower pH values, and can be greatly influenced by structural features of the lactone such as the ring size, substituents on the ring and the presence of double bonds within the ring. Many drugs and endogenous compounds are lactones or hydroxy acids and an enzyme capable of catalyzing the interchange between the open and closed forms in vivo could have pronounced effects upon their biological activity and/or distribution. d-Hexanolactone is the substrate of paraoxonases (PON) in humans. Human PON1 hydrolyzes over 30 different lactones (cyclic esters) and catalyzes the reverse reaction (lactonization) of a broad range of hydroxy acids. Hydroxy acid lactonization or lactone hydrolysis is catalyzed until equilibrium between the open and closed forms is reached. (PMID 15772423  , 12963475  , 12963475  ).|
HMDB0061705::6-Oxopiperidine-2-carboxylic acid, also known as 6-Oxo-pipecolinic acid, or 6-Oxo-piperidine-2-carboxylic acid, is associated with penicillin V in the production on Penicillium chrysogenum fermentations. Analysis of a 13C NMR spectrum of a concentrated broth from Penicillium chrysogenum fermentation revealed the presence of penicillin V and 6-oxo-piperidine-2-carboxylic acid(1) as the principal constituents. The latter lactam, identical to an authentic sample prepared by the cyclization of alpha-aminoadipic acid was present to the extent of 28 mol% of penicillin V. The lactam isolated form the broth was nearly racemic, having a slight excess of the L-isomer. This isolation provides further evidence regarding the biosynthetic precursors of the hydrophobic penicillins. (PMID: 6788737  |
HMDB0028699::Alanyl-Tyrosine is a dipeptide composed of alanine and tyrosine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0036657::Epi-alpha-amyrin, also known as epi-Α-amyrin, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as triterpenoids. These are terpene molecules containing six isoprene units. Epi-alpha-amyrin exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Within the cell, epi-alpha-amyrin is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Outside of the human body, epi-alpha-amyrin can be found in beverages and fruits. This makes epi-alpha-amyrin a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0028832::Glutamylvaline is a dipeptide composed of glutamate and valine, and is a proteolytic breakdown product of larger proteins. It belongs to the family of N-acyl-alpha amino acids and derivatives. These are compounds containing an alpha amino acid which bears an acyl group at its terminal nitrogen atom. Glutamylvaline is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. It is found in urine (PMID: 3782411  ).|
HMDB0000665::Leucinic acid has been isolated from amniotic fluid (PMID: 6467607  ), and have been found in a patient with dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase deficiency (PMID 6688766  ). Leucinic acid is a bacterial metabolite present in the urine of patients with short bowel syndrome. (PMID 4018104  ).|
HMDB0001123::2-Aminobenzoic acid, also known as anthranilate or anthranilic acid, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as aminobenzoic acids. These are benzoic acids containing an amine group attached to the benzene moiety. 2-Aminobenzoic acid exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 2-Aminobenzoic acid has been found in human epidermis tissue, and has also been primarily detected in feces, urine, blood, and cerebrospinal fluid. Within the cell, 2-aminobenzoic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and mitochondria. 2-Aminobenzoic acid exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. 2-Aminobenzoic acid participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, 2-Aminobenzoic acid and formic acid can be biosynthesized from formylanthranilic acid through the action of the enzyme kynurenine formamidase. Furthermore, 2-Aminobenzoic acid and L-alanine can be biosynthesized from L-kynurenine; which is catalyzed by the enzyme kynureninase. Furthermore, Pyruvic acid, L-glutamic acid, and 2-aminobenzoic acid can be biosynthesized from chorismate and L-glutamine through its interaction with the enzyme anthranilate synthase component. Finally, 2-Aminobenzoic acid and phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate can be converted into N-(5-phosphoribosyl)-anthranilate through the action of the enzyme anthranilate phosphoribosyltransferase. In humans, 2-aminobenzoic acid is involved in the tryptophan metabolism pathway. Outside of the human body, 2-aminobenzoic acid can be found in a number of food items such as alpine sweetvetch, corn, garden tomato, and conch. This makes 2-aminobenzoic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. 2-Aminobenzoic acid is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0032208::Citronellyl anthranilate, also known as 2-aminobenzoate or anthranilate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as aromatic monoterpenoids. These are monoterpenoids containing at least one aromatic ring. Citronellyl anthranilate is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Within the cell, citronellyl anthranilate is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP), cytoplasm and mitochondria. Citronellyl anthranilate has a sweet, fruity, and neroli taste.|
HMDB0028712::Arginyl-Isoleucine is a dipeptide composed of arginine and isoleucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0240219::trans-Vaccenic acid, also known as C18:1 trans-11 or 11(e)-vaccenate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as long-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 13 and 21 carbon atoms. trans-Vaccenic acid exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. trans-Vaccenic acid has been primarily detected in feces, saliva, blood, and urine. Within the cell, trans-vaccenic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm, membrane (predicted from logP) and adiposome. trans-Vaccenic acid can be converted into (11E)-octadecenoyl-CoA and O-[(11E)-octadecenoyl]-D-carnitine. |
HMDB0000630::Cytosine is a pyrimidine base that is a fundamental unit of nucleic acids. The deamination of cytosine alone is apparent and the nucleotide of cytosine is the prime mutagenic nucleotide in leukaemia and cancer.|
HMDB0003312::Daidzein is one of several known isoflavones. Isoflavones compounds are found in a number of plants, but soybeans and soy products like tofu and textured vegetable protein are the primary food source. Up until recently, daidzein was considered to be one of the most important and most studied isoflavones, however more recently attention has shifted to isoflavone metabolites. Equol represents the main active product of daidzein metabolism, produced via specific microflora in the gut. The clinical effectiveness of soy isoflavones may be a function of the ability to biotransform soy isoflavones to the more potent estrogenic metabolite, equol, which may enhance the actions of soy isoflavones, owing to its greater affinity for estrogen receptors, unique antiandrogenic properties, and superior antioxidant activity. However, not all individuals consuming daidzein produce equol. Only approximately one-third to one-half of the population is able to metabolize daidzein to equol. This high variability in equol production is presumably attributable to interindividual differences in the composition of the intestinal microflora, which may play an important role in the mechanisms of action of isoflavones. But, the specific bacterial species in the colon involved in the production of equol are yet to be discovered. (PMID: 18045128  , 17579894  , Curr Med Chem. 2007;14(26):2824-30., Mol Nutr Food Res. 2007 Jul;51(7):765-81.). Daidzein is a biomarker for the consumption of soy beans and other soy products.|
HMDB0006335::Beta-tocopherol is an antioxidant which is synthesized by photosynthetic organisms and play important roles in human and animal nutrition. betatocopherols can be oxidized in dry CH2Cl2 or CH3CN by one electron to form cation radicals that deprotonate to form the neutral phenoxyl radicals, which are then immediately further oxidized by one electron to the phenoxonium cations (an ECE electrochemical mechanism, where E signifies an electron transfer and C represents a chemical step, with the electrochemical mechanism having been determined by in situ spectroscopic analysis).The phenoxonium cation of beta-tocopherol is stable for several minutes. (PMID: 16771430  ).|
HMDB0061864::Dihomolinoleic acid, also known as 10Z,12Z-octadecadienoic acid, is classified as a linoleic acid or a linoleic acid derivative. Linoleic acid is a polyunsaturated omega-6 18-carbon fatty acid with two CC double bonds at the 9- and 12-positions. Dihomolinoleic acid is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and a very weak acidic compound. Dihomolinoleic acid can be found in black walnut, which makes dihomolinoleic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product. Dihomolinoleic acid can be found in blood, saliva, and feces.|
HMDB0001976::Docosapentaenoic acid is an unsaturated fatty acid found in fish oils. It is a minor constituent of the total serum unsaturated fatty acids in humans. Docosapentaenoic acid (22n-6) is practically insoluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Docosapentaenoic acid (22n-6) can be found in blood and urine, as well as in human adipose tissue, fibroblasts, and platelet tissues. Within the cell, docosapentaenoic acid (22n-6) is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). It can also be found in the extracellular space. In humans, docosapentaenoic acid (22n-6) is involved in alpha-linolenic acid and linoleic acid metabolism. Docosapentaenoic acid (22n-6) is found to be associated with thyroid cancer.|
HMDB0002823::Docosatrienoic acid is a poly-unsaturated fatty acid. Application of docosatrienic acid was shown to dose-dependently decrease the peak K+ current amplitide and accelerate the potassium activation and inactivation kinetics at all membrane potentials.|
HMDB0000933::Traumatic acid is a monounsaturated dicarboxylic acid naturally ocurring in plants. The compound was first isolated from wounded bean plants by American chemists James English Jr. and James Frederick Bonner and Dutch scientist Aire Jan Haagen-Smit in 1939. Traumatic acid is a potent wound healing agent in plants ("wound hormone") that stimulates cell division near a trauma site to form a protective callus and to heal the damaged tissue. It may also act as a growth hormone, especially in inferior plants (e.g. algae). Traumatic acid is biosynthesized in plants by non-enzimatic oxidation of traumatin (12-oxo-trans-10-dodecanoic acid), another wound hormone. At normal conditions, traumatic acid is a solid, crystalized, water insoluble substance.|
HMDB0002231::11Z-Eicosenoic acid, also known as gondoic acid, is a member of the class of compounds known as long-chain fatty acids. Long-chain fatty acids are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 13 and 21 carbon atoms. 11Z-Eicosenoic acid is practically insoluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 11Z-Eicosenoic acid is a monounsaturated omega-9 fatty acid found in a variety of plant oils. It is also found in the red cell membrane with increased concentrations in children with regressive autism (PMID: 16581239  ).|
HMDB0030021::Fucosterol, also known as fucosterin or 28-isofucosterol, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as stigmastanes and derivatives. These are sterol lipids with a structure based on the stigmastane skeleton, which consists of a cholestane moiety bearing an ethyl group at the carbon atom C24. Fucosterol exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Fucosterol has been found in human hepatic tissue tissue, and has also been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, fucosterol is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Outside of the human body, fucosterol can be found in coconut and lemon grass. This makes fucosterol a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0003363::Pectic acid is a water insoluble, transparent gelatinous acid existing in ripe fruit and some vegetables. Pectic acid exists in the cell walls of plant tissues, and these substances are ingested from vegetables, fruits, etc. Pectic substances are dealt with as dietary fibers, but other physiological functions are not clear. Pectic acid is degraded in the digestive tract of man and it is considered that digestion is by the action of intestinal bacteria. Pectic acid is mainly degraded to 4,5-unsaturated digalacturonic acid and perhaps to 4,5-unsaturated trigalacturonic acid, by the action of the enzymes from bacteria such as Bacteroides sp. and Clostridium sp. in the human digestive tract. Then, they are used as carbon sources by these pectic-acid-using bacteria. (PMID: 12111144  ).|
HMDB0028795::Glutaminylglutamine is a dipeptide composed of two glutamine residues. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis.|
HMDB0028800::Glutaminylisoleucine is a dipeptide composed of glutamine and isoleucine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis.|
HMDB0000712::Hexadecanedioic acid mono-L-carnitine ester is an intermediate in the formation of hexadecanedioylcarnitine. Hexadecanedioic acid has been shown to be activated by ATP-Mg2+ and CoA and transported into the inner mitochondrial compartment as the mono-L-carnitine ester. (PMID: 4703570  ).|
HMDB0000679::Homocitrulline is a metabolite that can be detected in larger amounts in the urine of individuals with urea cycle disorders (OMIM 238970  ). The accumulation of carbamylphosphate due to depleted supply of ornithine for the urea cycle may be responsible for the enhanced synthesis of homocitrulline and homoarginine in some cases (PMID 2474087  ).|
HMDB0028902::Isoleucyl-Asparagine is a dipeptide composed of isoleucine and asparagine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028903::Isoleucyl-Aspartate is a dipeptide composed of isoleucine and aspartate. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028924::Leucyl-Asparagine is a dipeptide composed of leucine and asparagine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028933::Leucyl-Leucine is a dipeptied compoosed of two leucine residues. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028942::Leucyl-Valine is a dipeptide composed of leucine and valine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0000720::Levulinic acid, also known as laevulinsaeure or levulate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as gamma-keto acids and derivatives. These are organic compounds containing an aldehyde substituted with a keto group on the C4 carbon atom. Levulinic acid exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Levulinic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as saliva, urine, and blood. Within the cell, levulinic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Levulinic acid can be converted into 5-aminolevulinic acid. Levulinic acid is a sweet, acetoin, and acidic tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as alcoholic beverages, cereals and cereal products, fruits, and green vegetables. This makes levulinic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0014426::Lidocaine is only found in individuals that have used or taken this drug. It is a local anesthetic and cardiac depressant used as an antiarrhythmia agent. Its actions are more intense and its effects more prolonged than those of procaine but its duration of action is shorter than that of bupivacaine or prilocaine. [PubChem]Lidocaine stabilizes the neuronal membrane by inhibiting the ionic fluxes required for the initiation and conduction of impulses thereby effecting local anesthetic action. Lidocaine alters signal conduction in neurons by blocking the fast voltage gated sodium (Na+) channels in the neuronal cell membrane that are responsible for signal propagation. With sufficient blockage the membrane of the postsynaptic neuron will not depolarize and will thus fail to transmit an action potential. This creates the anaesthetic effect by not merely preventing pain signals from propagating to the brain but by aborting their birth in the first place.|
HMDB0062656::Linoleamide, also known as 9,12-Octadecadienamide or Linoleic acid amide, is classified as a member of the Fatty amides. Fatty amides are carboxylic acid amide derivatives of fatty acids, that are formed from a fatty acid and an amine. Linoleamide is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral.  Linoleamide is a fatty amide lipid molecule|
HMDB0003073::Gamma-Linolenic acid is an omega-6 fatty acid produced in the body as the delta 6-desaturase metabolite of linoleic acid. It is converted to dihomo-gamma-linolenic acid, a biosynthetic precursor of monoenoic prostaglandins such as PGE1. (From Merck Index, 11th ed) -- Pubchem.|
HMDB0028958::Lysyl-Phenylalanine is a dipeptide composed of lysine and phenylalanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028959::Lysyl-Proline is a dipeptide composed of lysine and proline. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028963::Lysyl-Tyrosine is a dipeptide composed of lysine and tyrosine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0031518::D-Malic acid is found in herbs and spices. This enantiomer of rare occurrence; reported from fruits and leaves of Hibiscus sabdariffa (roselle) although there are many more isolations of malic acid with no opt. rotn. given and some may be of the R-for|
HMDB0032572::Methylparaben is found in alcoholic beverages. Methylparaben is an antimicrobial agent, preservative, flavouring agent. Methylparaben is a constituent  of cloudberry, yellow passion fruit, white wine, botrytised wine and Bourbon vanill|
HMDB0004620::N-alpha-Acetylarginine is one of the guanidino compounds found elevated in the serum of an hemodialyzed renal insufficient (uremic) pediatric population. (PMID 7777105  ). N-alpha-acetylarginine serum levels (and other guanidino compounds) were elevated of all the hyperargininemic patients are higher than the normal range. Untreated hyperargininemic patients have the highest guanidino compound levels in cerebrospinal fluid. (PMID 1690873  ). N-alpha-acetylarginine increases in urine hyperargininemic patients. During a low-arginine diet, together with sodium benzoate therapy, there was a marked decrease in plasma N-alpha-acetylarginine. (PMID 3987036  ).|
HMDB0032055::N-Acetylhistidine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as histidine and derivatives. Histidine and derivatives are compounds containing cysteine or a derivative thereof resulting from reaction of cysteine at the amino group or the carboxy group, or from the replacement of any hydrogen of glycine by a heteroatom. N-Acetylhistidine exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Within the cell, N-acetylhistidine is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Outside of the human body, N-acetylhistidine can be found in fishes. This makes N-acetylhistidine a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product.|
HMDB0029223::Alpha-Methylphenylalanine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenylpropanoic acids. Phenylpropanoic acids are compounds with a structure containing a benzene ring conjugated to a propanoic acid. Alpha-Methylphenylalanine is slightly soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa).|
HMDB0001406::Niacinamide or vitamin B3 is an important compound functioning as a component of the coenzyme NAD. Its primary significance is in the prevention and/or cure of blacktongue and pellagra. Most animals cannot manufacture this compound in amounts sufficient to prevent nutritional deficiency and it therefore must be supplemented through dietary intake. Niacinamide is used to increase the effect of radiation therapy on tumor cells. Niacin (nicotinic acid) and niacinamide, while both labeled as vitamin B3 also have different applications. Niacinamide is useful in arthritis and early-onset type I diabetes while niacin is an effective reducer of high cholesterol levels.|
HMDB0006809::Nicotinate D-ribonucleoside is involved in the nicotinate and nicotinamide metabolism pathways. Nicotinate D-ribonucleoside can be reversibly converted to nicotinate and nicotinate D-ribonucleoside by purine-nucleoside phosphorylase [EC:2.4.2.1] and 5'-nucleotidase [EC:3.1.3.5], respectively.|
HMDB0012273::Palmitic amide is a primary fatty acid amide coming from Palmitic acid (C16:0). Primary fatty acid amides (R-CO-NH2) is a class of compounds that have only recently been isolated and characterized from biological sources. Key questions remain regarding how these lipid amides are produced and degraded in biological systems. (PMID 15282088  ). Fatty acid amides lies in the competition with endocannabinoids for binding to the active site of the enzyme and thus in increasing the concentration of endocannabinoids, by preventing their degradation.It can be used as a marker of disease in subjects, e.g. first-onset, drug-naive patients; the disease may be, for example, schizophrenia, paranoid schizophrenia or an affective disorder.The metabolic network of primary fatty acid amides is more severely altered in affective disorder than in first onset, paranoid schizophrenia.|
HMDB0028995::Phenylalanyl-Glycine is a dipeptide composed of phenylalanine and glycine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029007::Phenylalanyl-Tyrosine is a dipeptide composed of phenylalanine and tyrosine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0000563::D-Phenyllactic acid, also known as L-3-phenyllactate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenylpropanoic acids. Phenylpropanoic acids are compounds with a structure containing a benzene ring conjugated to a propanoic acid. D-Phenyllactic acid exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). D-Phenyllactic acid has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, D-phenyllactic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm.|
HMDB0000748::L-3-Phenyllactic acid (or PLA) is a chiral aromatic compound involved in phenylalanine metabolism. It is likely produced from phenylpyruvate via the action of lactate dehydrogenase. The D-form of this organic acid is typically derived from bacterial sources while the L-form is almost certainly endogenous. Levels of phenyllactate are normally very low in blood or urine. High levels of PLA in the urine or blood are often indicative of phenylketonuria (PKU) and hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA). PKU is due to lack of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), so that phenylalanine is converted not to tyrosine but to phenylpyruvic acid (a precursor of phenylactate). In particular, excessive phenylalanine is typically metabolized into phenylketones through, a transaminase pathway route involving glutamate. Metabolites of this transamination reaction include phenylacetate, phenylpyruvate and phenethylamine.| In persons with PKU (phenylketonuria), dietary phenylalanine either accumulates in the body or some of it is converted to phenylpyruvic acid and then to phenyllactate through the action of lactate dehydrogenase. Individuals with PKU tend to excrete large quantities of phenylpyruvate, phenylacetate and phenyllactate, along with phenylalanine, in their urine. If untreated, mental retardation effects and microcephaly are evident by the first year along with other symptoms which include: unusual irritability, epileptic seizures and skin lesions. Hyperactivity, EEG abnormalities and seizures, and severe learning disabilities are major clinical problems later in life. A "musty or mousy" odor of skin, hair, sweat and urine (due to phenylacetate accumulation); and a tendency to hypopigmentation and eczema are also observed. The neural-development effects of PKU are primarily due to the disruption of neurotransmitter synthesis. In particular, phenylalanine is a large, neutral amino acid which moves across the blood-brain barrier (BBB) via the large neutral amino acid transporter (LNAAT). Excessive phenylalanine in the blood saturates the transporter. Thus, excessive levels of phenylalanine significantly decrease the levels of other LNAAs in the brain. But since these amino acids are required for protein and neurotransmitter synthesis, phenylalanine accumulation disrupts brain development, leading to mental retardation.|
HMDB0002019::Phytol is a natural linear diterpene alcohol which is used in the preparation of vitamins E and K1. It is also a decomposition product of chlorophyll. It is an oily liquid that is nearly insoluble in water, but soluble in most organic solvents. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0011179::L-prolyl-l-phenylalanine is a proteolytic breakdown product of larger proteins. It belongs to the family of Peptides. These are compounds containing an amide derived from two or more amino carboxylic acid molecules (the same or different) by formation of a covalent bond from the carbonyl carbon of one to the nitrogen atom of another. It is found in urine (PMID: 3782411  ).|
HMDB0001545::The 4-carboxyaldehyde form of vitamin B6 which is converted to pyridoxal phosphate which is a coenzyme for synthesis of amino acids, neurotransmitters (serotonin, norepinephrine), sphingolipids, aminolevulinic acid.|
HMDB0003371::Ribulose is a ketopentose- a monosaccharide containing five carbon atoms, and including a ketone functional group. It has chemical formula C5H10O5. Two diastereomers are possible, D-ribulose (D-erythro-pentulose) and L-ribulose (L-erythro-pentulose). D-ribulose is an intermediate in the fungal pathway for D-arabitol production.|
HMDB0000279::Saccharopine is an intermediate in the degradation of lysine, formed by the condensation of lysine and alpha-ketoglutarate. The saccharopine pathway is the main route for lysine degradation in mammals, and its first two reactions are catalyzed by enzymatic activities known as lysine-oxoglutarate reductase (LOR) and saccharopine dehydrogenase (SDH), which reside on a single bifunctional polypeptide (LOR/SDH) (EC 1.5.1.8). The reactions involved with saccharopine dehydrogenases have very strict substrate specificity for L-lysine, 2-oxoglutarate, and NADPH. LOR/SDH has been detected in a number of mammalian tissues, mainly in the liver and kidney, contributing not only to the general nitrogen balance in the organism but also to the controlled conversion of lysine into ketone bodies. A tetrameric form has also been observed in human liver and placenta. LOR activity has also been detected in brain mitochondria during embryonic development, and this opens up the question of whether or not lysine degradation has any functional significance during brain development. As a result, there is now a new focus on the nutritional requirements for lysine in gestation and infancy. Finally, LOR and/or SDH deficiencies seem to be involved in a human autosomal genetic disorder known as familial hyperlysinemia, which is characterized by serious defects in the functioning of the nervous system and characterized by a deficiency in lysine-ketoglutarate reductase, saccharopine dehydrogenase, and saccharopine oxidoreductase activities. Saccharopinuria (high amounts of saccharopine in the urine) and saccharopinemia (an excess of saccharopine in the blood) are conditions present in some inherited disorders of lysine degradation (PMID: 463877  , 10567240  , 10772957  , 4809305  ).| If present in sufficiently high levels, saccharopine can act as an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Saccharopine is an organic acid. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development.|
HMDB0029047::Serinyl-Proline is a dipeptide composed of serine and proline. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0034146::Stearamide, also known as crodamide S or kemamide S, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboximidic acids. These are organic acids with the general formula RC(=N)-OH (R=H, organic group). Thus, stearamide is considered to be a fatty amide lipid molecule. Stearamide exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Stearamide has been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, stearamide is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Stearamide can be biosynthesized from octadecanoic acid. |
HMDB0006547::Stearidonic acid is found in dietary plant oils which are metabolized to longer-chain, more unsaturated (n-3) PUFA. These oils appear to possess hypotriglyceridemic properties typically associated with fish oils.(PMID: 15173404  ). Stearidonic acid may be used as a precursor to increase the EPA content of human lipids and that combinations of gamma-linolenic acid and stearidonic acid eicosapentaenoic acid can be used to manipulate the fatty acid compositions of lipid pools in subtle ways. Such effects may offer new strategies for manipulation of cell composition in order to influence cellular responses and functions in desirable ways. (PMID: 15120716  ).|
HMDB0013078::Stearoylethanolamide is an N-acylethanolamine. N-acylethanolamines (NAEs) constitute a class of lipid compounds naturally present in both animal and plant membranes as constituents of the membrane-bound phospholipid, N-acylphosphatidylethanolamine (NAPE). NAPE is composed of a third fatty acid moiety linked to the amino head group of the commonly occurring membrane phospholipid, phosphatidylethanolamine. NAEs are released from NAPE by phospholipase D-type hydrolases in response to a variety of stimuli. Transient NAE release and accumulation has been attributed a variety of biological activities, including neurotransmission, membrane protection, and immunomodulation in animals. N-oleoylethanolamine is an inhibitor of the sphingolipid signaling pathway, via specific ceramidase inhibition (ceramidase converts ceramide to sphingosine). N-oleoylethanolamine blocks the effects of TNF- and arachidonic acid on intracellular Ca concentration. (PMID: 12692337  , 12056855  , 12560208  , 11997249  ).|
HMDB0000235::Thiamine or thiamin, also known as vitamin B1, is a colorless compound with the chemical formula C12H17N4OS. It is soluble in water and insoluble in alcohol. Thiamine decomposes if heated. Thiamine was first discovered by Umetaro Suzuki in Japan when researching how rice bran cured patients of Beriberi. Thiamine plays a key role in intracellular glucose metabolism and it is thought that thiamine inhibits the effect of glucose and insulin on arterial smooth muscle cell proliferation. thiamine plays an important role in helping the body convert carbohydrates and fat into energy. It is essential for normal growth and development and helps to maintain proper functioning of the heart and the nervous and digestive systems. Thiamine cannot be stored in the body; however, once absorbed, the vitamin is concentrated in muscle tissue.|
HMDB0062620::L-threonic Acid, also known as L-Threonate or Magnesium threonate, is classified as a sugar acid or a Sugar acid derivative. Sugar acids are compounds containing a saccharide unit which bears a carboxylic acid group. L-threonic Acid is considered to be soluble (in water) and acidic.  L-threonic Acid can be found throughout numerous foods such as Capers, Muscadine grapes, Black huckleberries, and Pecan nuts|
HMDB0062562::Urocanic acid, also known as Urocanate or 3-(1H-Imidazol-4-yl)-2-propenoic acid, is classified as an imidazolyl carboxylic acids or a derivative. An imidazolyl carboxylic acids or a derivative are organic compounds containing a carboxylic acid chain (of at least 2 carbon atoms) linked to an imidazole ring. Urocanic acid is considered a soluble (in water), acidic compound. Urocanic acid is an intermediate in the catabolism of L-histidine.|
HMDB0013609::Tryptophan (Trp or W) (sold for medical use as Tryptan) is one of the 20 standard amino acids. Its distinguishing structural characteristic is its indole functional group. The D-stereoisomer is occasionally found in naturally produced peptides (e.g. contryphan, the marine venom peptide).|
HMDB0029076::Tryptophyl-Alanine is a dipeptide composed of tryptophan and alanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029082::Tryptophyl-Glutamate is a dipeptide composed of tryptophan and glutamate. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029091::Tryptophyl-Proline is a dipeptide composed of tryptophan and proline. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029098::Tyrosyl-Alanine is a dipeptide composed of tyrosine and alanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029104::Tyrosyl-Glutamate is a dipeptide composed of tyrosine and glutamate. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029112::Tyrosyl-Phenylalanine is a dipeptide composed of tyrosine and phenylalanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029117::Tyrosyl-Tyrosine is a dipeptied compoosed of two tyrosine residues. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0000947::Undecanoic acid is a medium chain length monocarboxylic acid that appears to be involved in the control of triacylglycerol synthesis.(PMID 1739406  ). It is found in breast milk produced by women in the United States (PMID 16332663  ), in infant formulas ( Mljekarstvo (2005), 55(2), 101-112.), in seminal plasma (PMID 736283  ), and other fluids (PMID 8548929  ).|
HMDB0029125::Valyl-Glutamine is a dipeptide composed of valine and glutamine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029127::Valyl-Glycine is a dipeptide composed of valine and glycine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029136::Valyl-Serine is a dipeptide composed of valine and serine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029138::Valyl-Tryptophan is a dipeptide composed of valine and tryptophan. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0011564::MG(16:0/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups: 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well. MG(16:0/0:0/0:0), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position. MG(16:0/0:0/0:0) is a minor component of olive oil and other vegetable oil.|
HMDB0061708::13-Hydroxyoctadecadienoic acid (13-HODE) is the major lipoxygenation product derived from linoleic acid. It has been shown to be involved in cell proliferation and differentiation in a number of systems. 13-HODE is found to be produced by prostate tumors and cell lines and researchers believe there is a link between linoleic acid metabolism and the development or progression of prostate cancer. (PMID: 9367845  |
HMDB0000014::One of the principal nucleosides of DNA composed of cytosine and deoxyribose. A nucleoside consists of only a pentose sugar linked to a purine or pyrimidine base, without a phosphate group. When N1 is linked to the C1 of deoxyribose, deoxynucleosides and nucleotides are formed from cytosine and deoxyribose; deoxycytidine monophosphate (dCMP), deoxycytidine diphosphate (dCDP), deoxycytidine triphosphate (dCTP). CTP is the source of the cytidine in RNA (ribonucleic acid) and deoxycytidine triphosphate (dCTP) is the source of the deoxycytidine in DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid).|
HMDB0001202::Deoxycytidine (dihydrogen phosphate). A deoxycytosine nucleotide containing one phosphate group esterified to the deoxyribose moiety in the 2'-,3'- or 5- positions. Deficiency of the enzyme Deoxycytidine kinase (EC 2.7.1.74) is associated with resistance to antiviral and anticancer chemotherapeutic agents, whereas increased enzyme activity is associated with increased activation of these compounds to cytotoxic nucleoside triphosphate derivatives. (OMIM 125450  ).|
HMDB0029649::2,4,6-Trihydroxybenzoic acid, also known as phloroglucincarboxylic acid, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as hydroxybenzoic acid derivatives. Hydroxybenzoic acid derivatives are compounds containing a hydroxybenzoic acid (or a derivative), which is a benzene ring bearing a carboxyl and a hydroxyl groups. 2,4,6-Trihydroxybenzoic acid exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). Within the cell, 2,4,6-trihydroxybenzoic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Outside of the human body, 2,4,6-trihydroxybenzoic acid can be found in garden onion and onion-family vegetables. This makes 2,4,6-trihydroxybenzoic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0000840::Salicyluric acid is an aryl glycine conjugate formed by the body to eliminate excess salicylates, including aspirin. Aspirin is rapidly hydrolysed to salicylic acid which is further metabolized to various compounds, including salicyluric acid (SU) as well as various acyl and phenolic glucuronides, and hydroxylated metabolites. SU is the major metabolite of SA excreted in urine and it is present in the urine of people who have not taken salicylate drugs, although it has no anti-inflammatory effects in humans or in animals. More salicyluric acid (SU) is excreted in the urine of vegetarians than in non-vegetarians, primarily because fruits and vegetables are important sources of dietary salicylates. However, significantly less (10-15X) SU is excreted by vegetarians than individuals taking low-dose aspirin (PMID: 12944546  ). The induction of the salicyluric acid formation is one of the saturable pathways of salicylate elimination. The formation of the methyl ester of salicyluric acid is observed during the quantitation of salicyluric acid and other salicylate metabolites in urine by high-pressure liquid chromatography. This methyl ester formation causes artificially low values for salicyluric acid and high values for salicylic acid. (PMID: 6101164  , 6857178  ).|
HMDB0000422::2-Methylglutaric acid is an organic acid normally found in human urine, in healthy adults and children. 2-Methylglutaric acid is a metabolite of succinic acid, a citric acid cycle intermediate. (PMID: 2925825  , 8087979  , 16379391  , 1688138  ).|
HMDB0061701::2-Oleoylglycerophosphocholine belongs to the family of glycerophosphocholines, which are lipids containing a common glycerophosphate skeleton linked to at least one fatty acyl chain, and a choline moiety. Their general formula is C[N+](C)(C)CCOP(O)(=O)OCC(CO(R1))O(R2), where R1-R2 are fatty acid chains PC(0:0/18:1(9Z)) is made up of one 9Z-octadecenoyl(R2).|
HMDB0062651::2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine, also known as 2-18:1(Omega-9) LPC or PC(0:0/18:1(9Z)), is classified as a member of the 2-acyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholines. 2-acyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholines are glycerophosphocholines in which the glycerol is esterified with a fatty acid at O-2 position, and linked at position 3 to a phosphocholine. 2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and acidic.  2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine is a glycerophosphocholine lipid molecule|
HMDB0011533::MG(0:0/16:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011535::MG(0:0/18:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0061703::2-Stearoylglycerophosphoglycerol is a phosphatidylglycerol. It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylserine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, phosphatidylserines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. PG(0:0/18:0), in particular, consists of two octadecanoyl chains at positions C-1 and C-2. In E. coli glycerophospholipid metabolism, phosphatidylglycerol is formed from phosphatidic acid (1,2-diacyl-sn-glycerol 3-phosphate) by a sequence of enzymatic reactions that proceeds via two intermediates, cytidine diphosphate diacylglycerol (CDP-diacylglycerol) and phosphatidylglycerophosphate (PGP, a phosphorylated phosphatidylglycerol). Phosphatidylglycerols, along with CDP-diacylglycerol, also serve as precursor molecules for the synthesis of cardiolipin, a phospholipid found in membranes.|
HMDB0030180::20-Hydroxyecdysone, also known as ecdysterone or beta-ecdysone, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as hydroxy bile acids, alcohols and derivatives. These are bile acids, alcohols or derivatives bearing at least hydroxyl group. Thus, 20-hydroxyecdysone is considered to be a sterol lipid molecule. 20-Hydroxyecdysone exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. 20-Hydroxyecdysone has been found in human hepatic tissue tissue, and has also been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, 20-hydroxyecdysone is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. 20-Hydroxyecdysone can be biosynthesized from ecdysone. |
HMDB0006116::3-Hydroxyhippuric acid is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction: acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycine. 3-Hydroxyhippuric acid is an organic acid found in normal human urine. 3-Hydroxyhippuric acid is a metabolite of rutin detected in urine after consumption of tomato juice (a source of rutin). 3-Hydroxyhippuric acid has its origin in dietary procyanidins (a major source of polyphenols consisting of elementary flavan-3-ol (epi)catechin units). 3-Hydroxyhippuric acid is a microbial aromatic acid metabolite derived from dietary polyphenols, found in normal human urine. (PMID: 12592675  , 2338430  , 17015248  , 14556848  , 12742116  ).|
HMDB0000682::Indoxyl sulfate is a dietary protein metabolite and also a metabolite of the common amino acid tryptophan. Indoxyl sulfate is a circulating uremic toxin stimulating glomerular sclerosis and interstitial fibrosis. Indoxyl sulfate is one of the well-known substances of a group of protein-bound uremic retention solutes. Indoxyl sulfate increases the rate of progression of renal failure. In plasma, indoxyl sulfate is a protein-bound uremic solute that induces endothelial dysfunction by inhibiting endothelial proliferation and migration in vitro. Some studies suggest that indoxyl sulfate is also involved in oxidative stress. In hemodialyzed patients, serum levels of indoxyl sulfate are associated with levels of pentosidine, a marker of carbonyl and oxidative stress. In vitro, indoxyl sulfate increases reactive oxygen species (ROS) production in tubular cells and increases NAD(P)H oxidase activity in endothelial cells. Indoxyl sulfate impairs osteoblast function and induces abnormalities of bone turnover. Indoxyl sulfate strongly decreases the levels of glutathione, one of the most active antioxidant systems of the cell (PMID: 10681668  , 14681860  , 17471003  , 17403109  ).|
HMDB0030667::Chrysoeriol, also known as scoparol, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as 3'-o-methylated flavonoids. These are flavonoids with methoxy groups attached to the C3' atom of the flavonoid backbone. Thus, chrysoeriol is considered to be a flavonoid lipid molecule. Chrysoeriol exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Within the cell, chrysoeriol is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). Chrysoeriol participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, chrysoeriol can be biosynthesized from luteolin. Chrysoeriol is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, 7-O-(6-p-coumaroylglucosyl)chrysoeriol, 7-O-[alpha-L-rhamnosyl-(1->2)-beta-D-glucosyl]chrysoeriol, and geraldone. Chrysoeriol is a bitter tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as common sage, alfalfa, corn, and tarragon. This makes chrysoeriol a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0000555::3-Methyladipic acid is a metabolite of the catabolism of phytanic acid. Patients with adult Refsums disease (ARD) are unable to detoxify phytanic acid by alpha-oxidation, and so the w-oxidation pathway is the only metabolic pathway available for phytanic acid degradation. This pathway produces 3-methyladipic acid as the final metabolite, which is excreted in the urine (Wanders et al. 2001). Activity of the w-oxidation pathway is approximately doubled in ARD patients compared with normal individuals (PMID: 11948235  ).|
HMDB0000921::Cholestenone belongs to the class of organic compounds known as cholesterols and derivatives. Cholesterols and derivatives are compounds containing a 3-hydroxylated cholestane core. Thus, cholestenone is considered to be a sterol lipid molecule. Cholestenone exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Cholestenone has been found throughout all human tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as blood and urine. Within the cell, cholestenone is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Cholestenone is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, 3-ketocholest-4-en-26-al, 26-hydroxycholest-4-en-3-one, and 7alpha,25-dihydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one. |
HMDB0062551::4-Ethylphenylsulfate belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenylsulfates. Phenylsulfates are compounds containing a sulfuric acid group conjugated to a phenyl group. 4-Ethylphenylsulfate has been primarily detected in blood. 4-Ethylphenylsulfate can be biosynthesized from 4-ethylphenol. |
HMDB0013678::4-hydroxyhippuric acid is a microbial end-product derived from polyphenol metabolism by the microflora in the intestine (PMID: 22932811  ).  It is derived from 4-hydroxybenzoic acid derivatives which may undergo glycination in the liver and kidney.|
HMDB0000822::p-Hydroxymandelic acid is an acidic metabolite of p-octopamine and p-synephrine (p-phenylephrine). It is also a naturally occurring metabolite of tyramine. A specific enantiomer of p-hydroxymandelic aicd ((R)-(-)-p-hydroxymandelic -- also called pisolithin B) has been shown to exhibit antifungal properties.|
HMDB0000707::4-Hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid (4-HPPA) is a keto acid that is involved in the tyrosine catabolism pathway. It is a product of the enzyme (R)-4-hydroxyphenyllactate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.222) and is formed during tyrosine metabolism. The conversion from tyrosine to 4-HPPA is catalyzed by tyrosine aminotransferase. Additionally, 4-HPPA can be converted to homogentisic acid which is one of the precursors to ochronotic pigment. The enzyme 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid dioxygenase (HPD) catalyzes the reaction that converts 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid to homogentisic acid. A deficiency in the catalytic activity of HPD is known to lead to tyrosinemia type III, an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by elevated levels of blood tyrosine and massive excretion of tyrosine derivatives into urine. It has been shown that hawkinsinuria, an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by the excretion of 'hawkinsin,' may also be a result of HPD deficiency (PMID: 11073718  ). Moreover, 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid is also found to be associated in phenylketonuria, which is also an inborn error of metabolism. There are two isomers of HPPA, specifically 4HPPA and 3HPPA, of which 4HPPA is the most common.|
HMDB0000873::4-methylcatechol is a metabolite of homoprotocatechuic acid. It is both a substrate and a suicide inhibitor of Catechol 2,3-dioxygenase [EC 1.3.11.2]. (PMID 15006807  ). 4-methylcatechol is known to induce the production of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF). Recent studies have suggested that a lack of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the limbic system may cause neuropathic pain. (PMID: 22198556  ).|
HMDB0002432::Sumiki's acid is a naturally occurring human metabolite. (PMID: 949837  ) Sumiki's acid was first identified in the urine of a leukemic patient who was excreting an abnormal amount of its glycine derivative. (PMID: 5043270  ). Sumiki's acid was found to be excreted by normal subjects after a Phenylalanine loading, while heterozygotes for phenylketonuria don't excrete it (instead, they excrete 2-Hydroxybenzeneacetic acid). (PMID: 4708049  ). Patients receiving furan-containing sugar solutions i.v. convert 50% of the 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furfural into Sumiki's acid. (PMID: 4202014  ).|
HMDB0001173::5'-Methylthioadenosine (MTA) is a naturally occurring sulfur-containing nucleoside present in all mammalian tissues. It is produced from S-adenosylmethionine mainly through the polyamine biosynthetic pathway, where it behaves as a powerful inhibitory product. MTA is metabolized solely by MTA-phosphorylase, to yield 5-methylthioribose-1-phosphate and adenine, a crucial step in the methionine and purine salvage pathways, respectively. Evidence suggests that MTA can affect cellular processes in many ways. For instance, MTA has been shown to influence the regulation of gene expression, proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis (PMID: 15313459  ). 5-Methylthioadenosine can be found in human urine. Elevated excretion appears in children with severe combined immunodeficiency syndrome (SCID) (PMID: 3987052  ).|
HMDB0000486::7-Hydroxyoctanoic acid is a normal metabolite of medium-chain fatty acid oxidation, and is excreted in the urine as 7-hydroxyoctanoyl-beta-D-glucuronide (PMID 8799296  ), and have been found slightly elevated in the urine of persons with abnormal fatty acid metabolism (PMID 2094705  ).|
HMDB0011107::7-Methyluric acid, also known as 7-methylate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as xanthines. These are purine derivatives with a ketone group conjugated at carbons 2 and 6 of the purine moiety. 7-Methyluric acid is slightly soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 7-Methyluric acid has been primarily detected in urine. 7-Methyluric acid can be biosynthesized from 7-methylxanthine; which is catalyzed by the enzyme xanthine dehydrogenase/oxidase. In humans, 7-methyluric acid is involved in the caffeine metabolism pathway.|
HMDB0010223::9-HODE, which is a trans isomer of 9(S)-HODE, is an endogenous fatty acid PPARgamma agonist synthesized in the body from linoleic acid. Alpha-dimorphecolic activates Peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR)gamma in human endothelial cells increasing plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 expression. Plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1) is a major physiological inhibitor of fibrinolysis, with its plasma levels correlating with the risk for myocardial infarction and venous thrombosis. The regulation of PAI-1 transcription by endothelial cells (ECs), a major source of PAI-1, remains incompletely understood. Adipocytes also produce PAI-1, suggesting possible common regulatory pathways between adipocytes and ECs. Peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR)gamma is a ligand-activated transcription factor that regulates gene expression in response to various mediators such as 15-deoxy-Delta12, 14-prostaglandin J2 (15d-PGJ2) and oxidized linoleic acid (9- and 13-HODE). Alpha-dimorphecolic is a ligand of the G protein-coupled receptor G2A. (PMID: 10073956  , 16647253  , 16236715  ). 9(S)-HODE inhibits proliferation of NHEK cells by suppressing DNA synthesis and arresting the cell cycle in the G0/1-phase. 9-HODE-G2A signaling plays proinflammatory roles in skin under oxidative conditions. (PMID: 18034171  )|
HMDB0006899::Alanylglycine is a dipeptide found in human urine. It is a breakdown product from endogenous and exogenous proteins. This peptide is generated by dipeptidyl-dipeptidase (or tetrapeptide dipeptidase which leads to the release of dipeptides from a tetrapeptide, more specifically: Ala-GlyAla-Gly. The enzyme acts more slowly on Ala-AlaAla-Ala and Gly-GlyGly-Gly.|
HMDB0028697::Alanyl-Threonine is a dipeptide composed of alanine and threonine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0000462::Allantoin is a diureide of glyoxylic acid with the chemical formula C4H6N4O3. It is also called 5-ureidohydantoin or glyoxyldiureide. It is a product of the oxidation of uric acid. It is also a product of purine metabolism in most mammals except for higher apes, and it is present in their urine. In humans, uric acid is excreted instead of allantoin. The presence of allantoin in the urine can be an indication of microbial overgrowth or it can be created via non-enzymatic means through high levels of reactive oxygen species. In this regard, allantoin is sometimes used as a marker of oxidative stress. Allantoin can be isolated from cow urine or as a botanical extract of the comfrey plant. It has long been used for its healing, soothing, and anti-irritating properties. Allantoin helps to heal wounds and skin irritations and stimulates the growth of healthy tissue. Allantoin can be found in anti-acne products, sun care products, and clarifying lotions because of its ability to help heal minor wounds and promote healthy skin. Allantoin is frequently present in toothpaste, mouthwash, and other oral hygiene products as well as in shampoos, lipsticks, various cosmetic lotions and creams, and other cosmetic and pharmaceutical products.|
HMDB0004207::Glutamyllysine is a dipeptide composed of glutamate and lysine, and is a proteolytic breakdown product of larger proteins. It belongs to the family of N-acyl-alpha amino acids and derivatives. These are compounds containing an alpha amino acid which bears an acyl group at its terminal nitrogen atom. Glutamyllysine is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. The absorption of glutamyllysine is facilitated by the human intestinal oligopeptide transporter (PEPT1) (PMID 16759105  ).|
HMDB0033896::Anacardic acid is found in cashew nut. Anacardic acid is found in cashew nut shell.Anacardic acids are chemical compounds found in the shell of the cashew nut (Anacardium occidentale). Chemically, anacardic acid is a mixture of several closely related organic compounds. Each consists of a salicylic acid substituted with an alkyl chain that has 15 or 17 carbon atoms; anacardic acid is a mixture of saturated and unsaturated molecules. The exact mixture depends on the species of the plant and the major component is C5:3 all-Z. (Wikipedia|
HMDB0002124::Apigenin is a plant-derived flavonoid that has significant promise as a skin cancer chemopreventive agent. Apigenin inhibits the expression of involucrin (hINV), a marker of keratinocyte differentiation, is increased by differentiating agents via a protein kinase Cdelta (PKCdelta), Ras, MEKK1, and MEK3 cascade that increases AP1 factor level and AP1 factor binding to DNA elements in the hINV promoter. Apigenin suppresses the 12-O-tetradeconylphorbol-13-acetate-dependent increase in AP1 factor expression and binding to the hINV promoter. Apigenin also inhibits the increase in promoter activity observed following overexpression of PKCdelta, constitutively active Ras, or MEKK1. The suppression of PKCdelta activity is associated with reduced phosphorylation of PKCdelta-Y311. Activation of hINV promoter activity by the green tea polyphenol, (-)-epigellocathecin-3-gallate, is also inhibited by apigenin, suggesting that the two chemopreventive agents can produce opposing actions in keratinocytes (PMID: 16982614  ). Apigenin, a flavone abundantly found in fruits and vegetables, exhibits antiproliferative, anti-inflammatory, and antimetastatic activities through poorly defined mechanisms. This flavonoid provides selective activity to promote caspase-dependent-apoptosis of leukemia cells and uncover an essential role of PKCdelta during the induction of apoptosis by apigenin (PMID: 16844095  ). Apigenin markedly induces the expression of death receptor 5 (DR5) and synergistically acts with exogenous soluble recombinant human tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) to induce apoptosis in malignant tumor cells. On the other hand, apigenin-mediated induction of DR5 expression is not observed in normal human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Moreover, apigenin does not sensitize normal human peripheral blood mononuclear cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis (PMID: 16648565  ).|
HMDB0000646::L-Arabinose is a pentose with a sweet taste and one of the most abundant components released by complete hydrolysis of non-starch polysaccharides (NSP) of vegetable origin. However, NSPs are complicated compounds from the point of view of both physical structure and chemical composition, and they include cellulose, hemi-cellulose, pectin, and oligosaccharides. It is well-recognized that NSPs are resistant to the digestive enzymes and pass to the hind-gut where microbial degradation takes place. When L-arabinose is ingested in a digestible form, it is absorbed from the intestinal tract at a lower rate than glucose. A portion of the ingested L-arabinose is excreted in the urine. Although widely present in nature, L-arabinose is rarely used, and its physiological effects in vivo have received little attention. L-Arabinose selectively inhibits intestinal sucrase activity in a noncompetitive manner and suppresses the plasma glucose increase due to sucrose ingestion. Because the intestinal absorption of sucrose is inhibited in the presence of L-arabinose, the absorption of sucrose should be reduced by arabinose ingestion. Most of the studies reported so far on the absorption and utilization of L-arabinose relate to omnivore animal species other than humans. In a rare case of two autistic brothers that were not associated with any known metabolic disease, it was found the median value for their urine samples was 179 umol/mmol creatinine of L-arabinose, nearly six times greater than normal children (PMID: 11238761  , 8931641  , 1390604  , 7628083  ). L-Arabinose is found to be associated with ribose-5-phosphate isomerase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000568::D-Arabitol is a polyol. Polyols are sugar alcohols linked to the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). They are classified on the basis of the number of carbon atoms. Polyols occur in body fluids. A patient with leukoencephalopathy and peripheral neuropathy has been identified as suffering from ribose-5-phosphate isomerase (RPI) deficiency, a defect in the PPP. In this disorder, highly elevated concentrations of the C5 polyols such as D-arabitol are found in body fluids. In addition, transaldolase deficiency, another defect in the PPP, has been diagnosed in a patient with mainly liver problems among others. This patient had increased concentrations of polyols, mainly D-arabitol. So far, the pathophysiological role of polyols is relatively unknown. It is thought that D-arabitol is a metabolic end-product in humans. The strong brain-CSF-plasma gradient of polyols in the patient with RPI deficiency suggested a primary metabolic disorder. The mechanisms of brain and neuronal damage in RPI deficiency remain to be elucidated. A neurotoxic effect due to the accumulation of the polyols may play a role. D-Arabitol is a product of the enzyme D-arabinitol 4-dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.11) in the pentose and glucuronate interconversion pathway (PMID: 16435225  , J Inherit Metab Dis. 2005;28(6):1181-3).|
HMDB0028715::Arginyl-Methionine is a dipeptide composed of arginine and methionine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028717::Arginyl-Proline is a dipeptide composed of arginine and proline. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028721::Arginyl-Tyrosine is a dipeptide composed of arginine and tyrosine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028764::Aspartyl-Tryptophan is a dipeptide composed of aspartate and tryptophan. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0001352::Hydroxypyruvic acid, also known as 3-hydroxypyruvate or OH-pyr, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as beta hydroxy acids and derivatives. Beta hydroxy acids and derivatives are compounds containing a carboxylic acid substituted with a hydroxyl group on the C3 carbon atom. Hydroxypyruvic acid is soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). Hydroxypyruvic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. Within the cell, hydroxypyruvic acid is primarily located in the mitochondria, peroxisome and cytoplasm. Hydroxypyruvic acid and L-alanine can be biosynthesized from pyruvic acid and L-serine through the action of the enzyme serine--pyruvate aminotransferase. In humans, hydroxypyruvic acid is involved in the glycine and serine metabolism pathway. Hydroxypyruvic acid is also involved in several metabolic disorders, some of which include 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency, the sarcosinemia pathway, the hyperglycinemia, non-ketotic pathway, and dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency (DHPD). Outside of the human body, hydroxypyruvic acid can be found in a number of food items such as root vegetables, cascade huckleberry, chervil, and common salsify. This makes hydroxypyruvic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0000030::Biotin is an enzyme co-factor present in minute amounts in every living cell. Biotin is also known as vitamin H or B7 or coenzyme R. It occurs mainly bound to proteins or polypeptides and is abundant in liver, kidney, pancreas, yeast, and milk. Biotin has been recognized as an essential nutrient. Our biotin requirement is fulfilled in part through diet, through endogenous reutilization of biotin and perhaps through capture of biotin generated in the intestinal flora. The utilization of biotin for covalent attachment to carboxylases and its reutilization through the release of carboxylase biotin after proteolytic degradation constitutes the 'biotin cycle'. Biotin deficiency is associated with neurological manifestations, skin rash, hair loss and metabolic disturbances that are thought to relate to the various carboxylase deficiencies (metabolic ketoacidosis with lactic acidosis). It has also been suggested that biotin deficiency is associated with protein malnutrition, and that marginal biotin deficiency in pregnant women may be teratogenic.| Biotin acts as a carboxyl carrier in carboxylation reactions. There are four biotin-dependent carboxylases in mammals: those of propionyl-CoA (PCC), 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA (MCC), pyruvate (PC) and acetyl-CoA carboxylases (isoforms ACC-1 and ACC-2). All but ACC-2 are mitochondrial enzymes. The biotin moiety is covalently bound to the epsilon amino group of a Lysine residue in each of these carboxylases in a domain 60-80 amino acids long. The domain is structurally similar among carboxylases from bacteria to mammals. There are four biotin-dependent carboxylases in mammals: those of propionyl-CoA (PCC), 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA (MCC), pyruvate (PC) and acetyl-CoA carboxylases (isoforms ACC-1 and ACC-2). All but ACC-2 are mitochondrial enzymes. The biotin moiety is covalently bound to the epsilon amino group of a Lys residue in each of these carboxylases in a domain 60-80 amino acids long. The domain is structurally similar among carboxylases from bacteria to mammals.| Evidence is emerging that biotin participates in processes other than classical carboxylation reactions. Specifically, novel roles for biotin in cell signaling, gene expression, and chromatin structure have been identified in recent years. Human cells accumulate biotin by using both the sodium-dependent multivitamin transporter and monocarboxylate transporter 1. These transporters and other biotin-binding proteins partition biotin to compartments involved in biotin signaling: cytoplasm, mitochondria, and nuclei. The activity of cell signals such as biotinyl-AMP, Sp1 and Sp3, nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB, and receptor tyrosine kinases depends on biotin supply. Consistent with a role for biotin and its catabolites in modulating these cell signals, greater than 2000 biotin-dependent genes have been identified in various human tissues. Many biotin-dependent gene products play roles in signal transduction and localize to the cell nucleus, consistent with a role for biotin in cell signaling. Posttranscriptional events related to ribosomal activity and protein folding may further contribute to effects of biotin on gene expression. Finally, research has shown that biotinidase and holocarboxylase synthetase mediate covalent binding of biotin to histones (DNA-binding proteins), affecting chromatin structure; at least seven biotinylation sites have been identified in human histones. Biotinylation of histones appears to play a role in cell proliferation, gene silencing, and the cellular response to DNA repair. Roles for biotin in cell signaling and chromatin structure are consistent with the notion that biotin has a unique significance in cell biology. (PMID: 15992684  , 16011464  ).|
HMDB0041842::A hallucinogenic serotonin analog found in frog or toad skins, mushrooms, higher plants, and mammals, especially in the brains, plasma, and urine of schizophrenics. Bufotenin has been used as a tool in CNS studies and misused as a psychedelic. Bufotenin (5-OH-DMT), is a tryptamine related to the neurotransmitter serotonin. It is an alkaloid found in the skin of some species of toads; in mushrooms, higher plants, and mammals. Bufotenin is a chemical constituent in the venom and eggs of several species of toads belonging to the Bufo genus, but most notably in the Colorado River toad (Bufo alvarius) as it is the only toad species in which bufotenin is present in large enough quantities for a psychoactive effect. Extracts of toad venom, containing bufotenin and other bioactive compounds, have been used in some traditional medicines (probably derived from Bufo gargarizans), which has been used medicinally for centuries in China. Bufotenin is a constituent of the seeds of Anadenanthera colubrina and Anadenanthera peregrina trees. Anadenanthera seeds have been used as an ingredient in psychedelic snuff preparations by indigenous cultures of the Caribbean, Central and South America.|
HMDB0002780::(+)-Catechin, also known as cyanidanol or (2R,3S)-catechin, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as catechins. Catechins are compounds containing a catechin moiety, which is a 3,4-dihydro-2-chromene-3,5.7-tiol (+)-Catechin exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral (+)-Catechin has been found in human intestine and bladder tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood (+)-Catechin exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans (+)-Catechin is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, fisetinidol-(4alpha,8)-catechin, robinetinidol-(4alpha,8)-catechin, and arecatannin B1 (+)-Catechin is a bitter tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as sweet orange, strawberry, red bell pepper, and potato. This makes (+)-catechin a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0034220::Levoinositol (also known as 1L-chiro-Inositol or L-chiro-inositol, abbreviated LCI) is an inositol isoform. Inositol is a derivative of cyclohexane with six hydroxyl groups, making it a polyol. It also is known as a sugar alcohol, having exactly the same molecular formula as glucose or other hexoses. Inositol exists in nine possible stereoisomers, including scyllo-inositol, myo-inositol (the most abundant), muco-inositol, D-chiro-inositol, L-chiro-inositol, neo-inositol, allo-inositol, epi-inositol and cis-inositol. In humans, most inositol is synthesized in the kidneys, typically in amounts of a few grams per day. Levoinositol is found in dandelion and is widely distributed in higher plants predominantly as its monomethyl ether. Inositol is a cyclic polyalcohol that plays an important role as a second messenger in a cell, in the form of inositol phosphates. It is found in many foods, particularly in cereals with high bran content. It is an isomer of glucose that has traditionally been considered to be a B vitamin although it has an uncertain status as a vitamin and a deficiency syndrome has not been identified in man. (From Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th ed., p1379) Inositol phospholipids are important in signal transduction.|
HMDB0011747::Ciliatine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as organic phosphonic acids. These are organic compounds containing phosphonic acid. Ciliatine is soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). Ciliatine has been primarily detected in urine. Ciliatine participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, ciliatine can be biosynthesized from phosphonic acid. Ciliatine is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, ceramide 2-(methylamino)ethylphosphonate, N-(2-phosphonoethyl)cholamide, and CMP-2-aminoethylphosphonate. |
HMDB0000634::Citraconic acid, also known as methylmaleic acid or 2-methylmaleate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as methyl-branched fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an acyl chain that has a methyl branch. Usually, they are saturated and contain only one or more methyl group. However, branches other than methyl may be present. Citraconic acid exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). Citraconic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. Within the cell, citraconic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and adiposome. Citraconic acid can be biosynthesized from maleic acid. |
HMDB0000426::Citramalic acid is an analog of malic acid. The structure is citramalic acid is similar to the structure of malic acid except it has an extra CH3 group on it. It can inhibit the production of malic acid.|
HMDB0004231::In cosmetics, panthenol is a humectant, emollient and moisturizer. It binds to hair follicles readily and is a frequent component of shampoos and hair conditioners (in concentrations of 0.1-1%). It coats the hair and seals its surface, lubricating follicles and making strands appear shiny. Panthenol is the alcohol analog of pantothenic acid (vitamin B5), and is thus the provitamin of B5. In organisms it is quickly oxidized to pantothenate. Panthenol is a viscous transparent liquid at room temperature, but salts of pantothenic acid (for example sodium pantothenate) are powders (typically white). It is well soluble in water, alcohol and propylene glycol, soluble in ether and chloroform, and slightly soluble in glycerin.|
HMDB0014487::Diltiazem is only found in individuals that have used or taken this drug. It is a benzothiazepine derivative with vasodilating action due to its antagonism of the actions of the calcium ion in membrane functions. It is also teratogenic. [PubChem]Possibly by deforming the channel, inhibiting ion-control gating mechanisms, and/or interfering with the release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum, diltiazem, like verapamil, inhibits the influx of extracellular calcium across both the myocardial and vascular smooth muscle cell membranes. The resultant inhibition of the contractile processes of the myocardial smooth muscle cells leads to dilation of the coronary and systemic arteries and improved oxygen delivery to the myocardial tissue.|
HMDB0062657::Epiandrosterone sulfate, also known as (3beta,5alpha)-17-oxoandrostan-3-yl hydrogen sulfate or epiandrosterone sulphuric acid, is a member of the class of compounds known as sulfated steroids. Sulfated steroids are sterol lipids containing a sulfate group attached to the steroid skeleton. Epiandrosterone sulfate is practically insoluble (in water) and an extremely strong acidic compound (based on its pKa). Epiandrosterone sulfate can be synthesized from 5alpha-androstane and synthesized into epiandrosterone. Epiandrosterone sulfate can be found in blood and feces.|
HMDB0000878::Ergosterol, a sterol, is the biological precursor to Vitamin D2. It is turned into viosterol by ultraviolet light, and is then converted into ergocalciferol, which is a form of Vitamin D. Ergosterol is a component of fungal cell membranes, serving the same function that cholesterol serves in animal cells. Ergosterol is not found in mammalian cell membranes.|
HMDB0005810::Eriodictyol belongs to the class of organic compounds known as flavanones. Flavanones are compounds containing a flavan-3-one moiety, with a structure characterized by a 2-phenyl-3,4-dihydro-2H-1-benzopyran bearing a ketone at the carbon C3. Thus, eriodictyol is considered to be a flavonoid lipid molecule. Eriodictyol exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Eriodictyol has been found in human liver and kidney tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. Within the cell, eriodictyol is primarily located in the cytoplasm and membrane (predicted from logP). Eriodictyol is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, neoeriocitrin, diinsininol, and (2S)-eriodictyol 7-O-(6''-O-galloyl)-beta-D-glucopyranoside. |
HMDB0010325::Ethyl glucuronide is a natural human metabolite of Ethanol generated in the liver by UDP glucuonyltransferase. Glucuronidation is used to assist in the excretion of toxic substances, drugs or other substances that cannot be used as an energy source. Glucuronic acid is attached via a glycosidic bond to the substance, and the resulting glucuronide, which has a much higher water solubility than the original substance, is eventually excreted by the kidneys. Ethyl glucuronide is a general biomarker for the consumption of alcohol|
HMDB0001933::Furosemide or frusemide is a loop diuretic used in the treatment of congestive heart failure and edema. It is most commonly marketed by Aventis Pharma under the brand name Lasix. It has also been used to prevent thoroughbred race horses from bleeding through the nose during races. An antibiotic isolated from the fermentation broth of Fusidium coccineum. (From Merck Index, 11th ed) It acts by inhibiting translocation during protein synthesis.|
HMDB0001931::gamma-CEHC (gamma-carboxyethyl hydroxychroman) is a metabolite of vitamin E. Smokers have a significantly higher excretion level of urinary gamma-CEHC, and therefore require more vitamin E compared to non-smokers. Cigarette smoking is associated with increased oxidative stress and increased risk of degenerative disease. As the major lipophilic antioxidant, requirements for vitamin E may also be higher in smokers due to increased utilization (PMID: 15493460  ).|
HMDB0034367::gamma-Glutamylmethionine is a dipeptide composed of gamma-glutamate and methionine, and is a proteolytic breakdown product of larger proteins. It belongs to the family of N-acyl-alpha amino acids and derivatives. These are compounds containing an alpha amino acid which bears an acyl group at its terminal nitrogen atom. gamma-Glutamylmethionine is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. gamma-Glutamylmethionine is found in onion-family vegetables. It is isolated from the seeds of onion (Allium cepa), kidney bean (Phaseolus vulgaris), mung bean (Vigna radiata), garlic (Allium sativum), and black gram (Vigna mungo).|
HMDB0002520::glycerol-2-phosphate is a component of glycerolipid metabolism. It is formed in minor quanitites, as the alpha glycerophosphorate is preferentially formed in this manner. Also used as a biological buffer (Sigma-Aldrich).|
HMDB0005781::Glycitein is a soy isoflavone. It is a minor component in most soy products. It's role of reducing low-density lipoprotein cholesterol is not clear. Glycitein is metabolized by human gut microorganisms and may follow metabolic pathways similar to other soy isoflavones (PMID: 12011578  ; 16248547). Glycitein is a biomarker for the consumption of soy beans and other soy products.|
HMDB0000708::Glycoursodeoxycholic acid is an acyl glycine and a bile acid-glycine conjugate. It is a secondary bile acid produced by the action of enzymes existing in the microbial flora of the colonic environment. In hepatocytes, both primary and secondary bile acids undergo amino acid conjugation at the C-24 carboxylic acid on the side chain, and almost all bile acids in the bile duct therefore exist in a glycine conjugated form (PMID:16949895  ). Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ).|
HMDB0005782::Hesperetin is a cholesterol lowering flavanoid found in a number of citrus juices. It appears to reduce cholesteryl ester mass and inhibit apoB secretion by up to 80%. Hesperetin may have antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-allergic, hypolipidemic, vasoprotective and anticarcinogenic actions. Hesperetin is a biomarker for the consumption of citrus fruits.|
HMDB0000705::Hexanoylcarnitine is an acylcarnitine. Numerous disorders have been described that lead to disturbances in energy production and in intermediary metabolism in the organism which are characterized by the production and excretion of unusual acylcarnitines. A mutation in the gene coding for carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase or the OCTN2 transporter aetiologically causes a carnitine deficiency that results in poor intestinal absorption of dietary L-carnitine, its impaired reabsorption by the kidney and, consequently, in increased urinary loss of L-carnitine. Determination of the qualitative pattern of acylcarnitines can be of diagnostic and therapeutic importance. The betaine structure of carnitine requires special analytical procedures for recording. The ionic nature of L-carnitine causes a high water solubility which decreases with increasing chain length of the ester group in the acylcarnitines. Therefore, the distribution of L-carnitine and acylcarnitines in various organs is defined by their function and their physico-chemical properties as well. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) permits screening for free and total carnitine, as well as complete quantitative acylcarnitine determination, including the long-chain acylcarnitine profile (PMID: 17508264  , Monatshefte fuer Chemie (2005), 136(8), 1279-1291., Int J Mass Spectrom. 1999;188:39-52.). Hexanoylcarnitine is a medium-chain acylcarnitine present in the urine of patients with medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (PubMed ID 1635814 ). Moreover, hexanoylcarnitine is found to be associated with glutaric aciduria II, which is also an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000701::Hexanoylglycine is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction: acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycineHexanoylglycine is a fatty acid metabolite, it appears in the urine of patients with hereditary medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency (PMID 2775902  ), which is a genetic disorder.|
HMDB0062583::N-benzoylglycinate, also known as N-Benzoylglycinic acid anion or 2-Benzamidoacetate, is classified as a member of the Hippuric acids. Hippuric acids are compounds containing hippuric acid, which consists of a of a benzoyl group linked to the N-terminal of a glycine. N-benzoylglycinate is considered to be slightly soluble (in water) and acidic|
HMDB0028896::Histidinyl-Tryptophan is a dipeptide composed of histidine and tryptophan. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0062555::hydroxyisovaleroyl carnitine is classified as a member of the Acyl carnitines. Acyl carnitines are organic compounds containing a fatty acid with the carboxylic acid attached to carnitine through an ester bond. hydroxyisovaleroyl carnitine is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and acidic.  hydroxyisovaleroyl carnitine is a fatty ester lipid molecule|
HMDB0000760::Hyocholic acid is a bile acid. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ).|
HMDB0038666::L-N-(1H-Indol-3-ylacetyl)aspartic acid is found in garden tomato (var.). L-N-(1H-Indol-3-ylacetyl)aspartic acid is a constituent of many plant species including soybean Glycine max. It is a metabolite of 1H-Indole-3-acetic acid BNC14-M in plant tissues.|
HMDB0013240::Indoleacetyl glutamine is indolic derivative of tryptophan. It is generated from indoleacetic acid. Indoleacetic acid (IAA) is a breakdown product of tryptophan metabolism and is often produced by the action of bacteria in the mammalian gut. Some endogenous production of IAA in mammalian tissues also occurs. It may be produced by the decarboxylation of tryptamine or the oxidative deamination of tryptophan. Indoleacetyl glutamine frequently occurs at low levels in urine and has been found in elevated levels in the urine of patients with hartnup disease, the characteristic symptoms of the disease are mental retardation and pellagra like skin rash.|
HMDB0005801::Kaempferol is a natural flavonoid which has been isolated from Delphinium, Witch-hazel, grapefruit, and other plant sources. Kaempferol is a yellow crystalline solid with a melting point of 276-278 degree centigrade. It is slightly soluble in water, and well soluble in hot ethanol and diethyl ether. Kaempferol is a biomarker for the consumption of dried and cooked beans.|
HMDB0028923::Leucyl-Arginine is a dipeptide composed of leucine and arginine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0005800::Luteolin is a naturally occurring flavonoid. (PMID: 17168665  ). The flavonoids are polyphenolic compounds found as integral components of the human diet. They are universally present as constituents of flowering plants, particularly of food plants. The flavonoids are phenyl substituted chromones (benzopyran derivatives) consisting of a 15-carbon basic skeleton (C6-C3-C6), composed of a chroman (C6-C3) nucleus (the benzo ring A and the heterocyclic ring C), also shared by the tocopherols, with a phenyl (the aromatic ring B) substitution usually at the 2-position. Different substitutions can typically occur in the rings, A and B. Several plants and spices containing flavonoid derivatives have found application as disease preventive and therapeutic agents in traditional medicine in Asia for thousands of years.| The selection of a particular food plant, plant tissue or herb for its potential health benefits appears to mirror its flavonoid composition. The much lower risk of colon, prostate and breast cancers in Asians, who consume more vegetables, fruits and tea than populations in the Western hemisphere do, raises the question of whether flavonoid components mediate the protective effects of diets rich in these foodstuffs by acting as natural chemopreventive and anticancer agents. An impressive body of information exists on the antitumoral action of plant flavonoids. In vitro work has concentrated on the direct and indirect actions of flavonoids on tumor cells, and has found a variety of anticancer effects such as cell growth and kinase activity inhibition, apoptosis induction, suppression of the secretion of matrix metalloproteinases and of tumor invasive behavior. Furthermore, some studies have reported the impairment of in vivo angiogenesis by dietary flavonoids. Experimental animal studies indicate that certain dietary flavonoids possess antitumoral activity. The hydroxylation pattern of the B ring of the flavones and flavonols, such as luteolin seems to critically influence their activities, especially the inhibition of protein kinase activity and antiproliferation. The different mechanisms underlying the potential anticancer action of plant flavonoids await further elucidation. Certain dietary flavonols and flavones targeting cell surface signal transduction enzymes, such as protein tyrosine and focal adhesion kinases, and the processes of angiogenesis appear to be promising candidates as anticancer agents. Further in vivo studies of these bioactive constituents is deemed necessary in order to develop flavonoid-based anticancer strategies. In view of the increasing interest in the association between dietary flavonoids and cancer initiation and progression, this important field is likely to witness expanded effort and to attract and stimulate further vigorous investigations. (PMID: 16097445  ).|
HMDB0030776::Maltol is found in animal foods. Maltol is found in chicory, roasted malt, breads, milk, heated butter, uncured smoked pork, cocoa, coffee, roasted barley, roasted peanuts, roasted filbert, soybean etc. Maltol is a flavour enhancer and flavouring agent.Maltol is a naturally occurring organic compound that is used primarily as a flavor enhancer. It is found in the bark of larch tree, in pine needles, and in roasted malt (from which it gets its name). Because it has the odor of cotton candy and caramel, maltol is used to impart a sweet aroma to fragrances. Maltol's sweetness adds to the odor of freshly baked bread, and is used as a flavor enhancer (E number E636) in breads and cakes. (Wikipedia|
HMDB0001078::Mannose-6-phosphate is a potent competitive inhibitor of pinocytosis of human platelet beta-glucuronidase and it is a necessary component of the recognition marker on the enzyme for pinocytosis by human fibroblasts as well (PMID 908752  ).|
HMDB0028966::Methionyl-Alanine is a dipeptide composed of methionine and alanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028980::Methionyl-Phenylalanine is a dipeptide composed of methionine and phenylalanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028983::Methionyl-Threonine is a dipeptide composed of methionine and threonine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0000853::N-Acetyl-b-D-galactosamine is an oligosaccharide residue found in the lining and glandular epithelium, the stroma and the vessels (capillary and large vessels of the human postmenopausal endometrium. (PMID: 8930627  ). It is suspected that N-Acetyl-b-D-galactosamine is a molecule that binds to IgA in the glomerular mesangium in Henoch-Schoenlein purpura associated nephropathy (the most common vasculitis of childhood). (PMID: 10732728  ).|
HMDB0001129::N-Acetylmannosamine is a monosaccharide that is used as a precursor in the chemical or enzymatic synthesis of the neuraminic acids found in glycolipids and glycoproteins. N-Acetyl-D-mannosamine (ManNAc) is a specific substrate for the synthesis of N-acetylneuraminic acid, the essential precursor of bacterial capsular polysialic acid (PA). N-Acetyl-D-mannosamine is used for the synthesis of sialic acid. It is also a synthetic intermediate for a number of carbohydrate-derived families of biologically active compounds and pharmaceutical candidates.|
HMDB0062660::N-methyl-L-glutamic Acid, also known as N-Methylglutamate or (2S)-2-(methylamino)Pentanedioic acid, is classified as a glutamic acid or a Glutamic acid derivative. Glutamic acids are compounds containing glutamic acid or a derivative thereof resulting from reaction of glutamic acid at the amino group or the carboxy group, or from the replacement of any hydrogen of glycine by a heteroatom. N-methyl-L-glutamic Acid is considered to be soluble (in water) and acidic|
HMDB0003646::N-Methylhydantoin is a small molecular weight polar substance, the product of degradation of creatinine by bacteria (hydrolyzed by creatinine iminohydrolase, EC 3.5.4.21 to ammonia and N-methylhydantoin). In mammals, the metabolism of 1-methylhydantoin occurs via 5-hydroxy-1-methylhydantoin. In a reported human case, 1-Methylhydantoin was found as an unexpected metabolite of the intelligence-affecting substance dupracetam. (PMID: 15533691  , 8287520  , 3196760  , 7294979  ).|
HMDB0013631::N-oleoyl glycine is an acylglycine with oleoic acid (C18:1(9Z))moiety attached to glycine molecule. It is reported to be preferentially produced by human glycine N-acyltransferase-like 2 (hGLYATL2), a member of a gene family of 4 putative glycine conjugating enzymes, synthesizes various N-acyl glycines. Recombinantly expressed hGLYATL2 efficiently conjugated oleoyl-CoA, arachidonoyl-CoA, and other medium- and long-chain acyl-CoAs to glycine. The enzyme was specific for glycine as an acceptor molecule.|
HMDB0094698::N-propionylalanine is classified as a member of the n-acyl-l-alpha-amino acids. N-acyl-L-alpha-amino acids are n-acylated alpha amino acids which have the L-configuration of the alpha-carbon atom. N-propionylalanine is considered to be a slightly soluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. N-propionylalanine can be found in humans.|
HMDB0001563::1-Methylguanosine is a methylated nucleoside. It is known that some modified, especially methylated, nucleosides originating from RNA degradation are excreted in abnormal levels in the urine of patients with malignant tumours. These nucleosides have been proposed as tumour markers. Their measurement could provide a non-invasive diagnostic method, help identify different cancers, and monitor any therapeutic effects (PMID: 9129323  ).|
HMDB0041623::N6-Carbamoyl-L-threonyladenosine is a member of the class of compounds known as purine nucleosides. Purine nucleosides are compounds composed of a purine base attached to a ribosyl or deoxyribosyl moiety. N6-Carbamoyl-L-threonyladenosine is slightly soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Within the cell, N6-carbamoyl-L-threonyladenosine is primarily located in the cytoplasm. It can also be found in the extracellular space. N6-Carbamoyl-L-threonyladenosine is a minor constituent found in human and bovine milk (PMID: 7702711  ).|
HMDB0001923::Naproxen (INN) is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) commonly used for the reduction of mild to moderate pain, fever, inflammation and stiffness caused by conditions such as osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, gout, ankylosing spondylitis, injury (like fractures), menstrual cramps, tendonitis, bursitis, and the treatment of primary dysmenorrhea. Naproxen and naproxen sodium are marketed under various trade names including: Aleve, Anaprox, Naprogesic, Naprosyn, Naprelan; Naproxen is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) commonly used for the reduction of mild to moderate pain, fever, inflammation and stiffness caused by conditions such as osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, gout, ankylosing spondylitis, injury (like fractures), menstrual cramps, tendonitis, bursitis, and the treatment of primary dysmenorrhea. Naproxen and naproxen sodium are marketed under various trade names including: Aleve, Anaprox, Naprogesic, Naprosyn, Naprelan. Naproxen was first marketed as the prescription drug Naprosyn in 1976 and naproxen sodium was first marketed under the trade name Anaprox in 1980. It remains a prescription-only drug in much of the world. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the use of naproxen sodium as an over-the-counter (OTC) drug in 1991, where OTC preparations are sold under the trade name Aleve. In Australia, small packets of lower-strength preparations of naproxen sodium are Schedule 2 Pharmacy Medicines; Naproxen is a member of the 2-arylpropionic acid (profen) family of NSAIDs. It is an odorless, white to off-white crystalline substance. It is lipid-soluble, practically insoluble in water with a low pH (below pH 4), while freely soluble in water at 6 pH and above. Naproxen has a melting point of 153 degree centigrade.|
HMDB0000782::Octadecanedioic acid, also known as 1,18-octadecanedioate or octadecane-1,18-dioate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as long-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 13 and 21 carbon atoms. Octadecanedioic acid is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Octadecanedioic acid has been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, octadecanedioic acid is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP), cytoplasm and adiposome.|
HMDB0005065::Oleoylcarnitine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as acyl carnitines. These are organic compounds containing a fatty acid with the carboxylic acid attached to carnitine through an ester bond. Oleoylcarnitine is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Oleoylcarnitine has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as blood and urine. Within the cell, oleoylcarnitine is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Oleoylcarnitine can be biosynthesized from oleic acid. |
HMDB0029937::4-beta-Gentiobiosylglucose is found in cereals and cereal products. 4-beta-Gentiobiosylglucose is produced by transferase action on cellobiose of b-glucosides of barley (Hordeum vulgare). Claimed use as low-calorie flavouring agent in food, beverages, medicines. Promotes growth of beneficial intestinal flora.|
HMDB0006344::Phenylacetylglutamine is a product formed from the conjugation of phenylacetate and glutamine. Technically, it is the amino acid acetylation product of phenylacetate (or phenylbutyrate after beta-oxidation). Phenylacetylglutamine is a normal constituent of human urine, but other mammals such as the dog, cat, rat, monkey, sheep, and horse do not excrete this compound. Phenylacetyl-CoA and L-glutamine react to form phenylacetylglutamine and coenzyme A. The enzyme (glutamine N-acetyl transferase) that catalyzes this reaction has been purified from human liver mitochondria and shown to be a polypeptide species distinct from glycine-N-acyltransferase. Phenylacetylglutamine is a major nitrogenous metabolite that accumulates in uremia (PMID: 2791363  , 8972626  ). It has been shown that over 50% of urine phenylacetylglutamine may be derived from kidney conjugation of free plasma phenylacetic acid and/or from the kidney's preferential filtration of conjugated phenylacetic acid (PMID: 6420430  ).|
HMDB0029001::Phenylalanyl-Methionine is a dipeptide composed of phenylalanine and methionine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029006::Phenylalanyl-Tryptophan is a dipeptide composed of phenylalanine and tryptophan. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0000224::Phosphoethanolamine (PE) is a phosphomonoester metabolite of the phospholipid metabolism. PE is a precursor of phospholipid synthesis and a product of phospholipid breakdown. Phosphomonoesters are present at much higher levels in brain than in other organs. In developing brain, phosphomonoesters are normally elevated during the period of neuritic proliferation. This also coincides with the occurrence of normal programmed cell death and synaptic pruning in developing brain. These findings are consistent with the role of phosphomonoesters in membrane biosynthesis. PE shows a strong structural similarity to the inhibitory neurotransmitter, GABA, and the GABAB receptor partial agonist, 3-amino-propylphosphonic acid. PE is a phosphomonoester which is decreased in post-mortem Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain (PMID: 7791524  , 8588821  , 11566853  ).|
HMDB0002107::Phthalic acid is an aromatic dicarboxylic acid, with formula C6H4(COOH)2. Phthalic acid is used mainly in the form of the anhydride to produce other chemicals such as dyes, perfumes, saccharin, phthalates and many other useful products. Phthalic acid, when found in tissues or biofluids arises from exposure to these phthalate products. Phthalate is an environmental chemical of heightened public concern because reports of its potential risk to male reproductive health (PMID 16804814  ), being significantly associated with reduced sperm concentration to pesticide concentration in men's urine (PMID 16804812  ). Within the reproductive tract, the male is exquisitely vulnerable to the effects of anti-androgens during development due the reliance on the synthesis and action of androgens for the masculinization of the male reproductive tract. The ability of phthalates to suppress androgen synthesis during development and to induce testicular dysgenesis together with cryptorchidism and hypospadias has raised considerable concern. (PMID 15016950  ).|
HMDB0004610::Phytosphingosine is a phospholipid. Phospholipids are a class of lipids and a major component of all biological membranes; sphingolipid metabolites, such as sphingosine and ceramide, are highly bioactive compounds and are involved in diverse cell processes, including cell-cell interaction, cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. Phytosphingosine is also one of the most widely distributed natural sphingoid bases, which is abundant in fungi and plants, and also found in animals including humans. Phytosphingosine is structurally similar to sphingosine; phytosphingosine possesses a hydroxyl group at C-4 of the sphingoid long-chain base. The physiological roles of phytosphingosine are largely unknown. Phytosphingosine induces apoptosis in human T-cell lymphoma and non-small cell lung cancer cells, and induces caspase-independent cytochrome c release from mitochondria. In the presence of caspase inhibitors, phytosphingosine-induced apoptosis is almost completely suppressed, suggesting that phytosphingosine-induced apoptosis is largely dependent on caspase activities. (PMID: 12576463  , 12531554  , 8046331  , 8048941  ,8706124  ).|
HMDB0000857::Pimelic acid is a group of compounds that are derivatives of heptanedioic acid with the general formula R-C7H11O4. Pimelic acid is the organic compound with the formula HO2C(CH2)5CO2H. Derivatives of pimelic acid are involved in the biosynthesis of the amino acid called lysine. Pimelic acid is one methylene longer than a related dicarboxylic acid, adipic acid, a precursor to many polyesters and polyamides. Pimelic acid has been synthesized from cyclohexanone and from salicylic acid.[1] In the former route, the additional carbon is suppled by dimethyloxalate, which reacts with the enolate. (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0034219::D-Pinitol is found in carob. D-Pinitol is widely distributed in plants.Pinitol is a cyclitol, a cyclic polyol. It is a known anti-diabetic agent isolated from Sutherlandia frutescens leaves. (Wikipedia). D-Pinitol is a biomarker for the consumption of soy beans and other soy products.|
HMDB0011178::L-prolyl-l-glycine is a proteolytic breakdown product of larger proteins. It belongs to the family of Peptides. These are compounds containing an amide derived from two or more amino carboxylic acid molecules (the same or different) by formation of a covalent bond from the carbonyl carbon of one to the nitrogen atom of another. It is found in urine (PMID: 3782411  ).|
HMDB0029028::Prolyl-Tryptophan is a dipeptide composed of proline and tryptophan. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0001943::Pseudoephedrine (commonly abbreviated as PSE) is a sympathomimetic amine commonly used as a decongestant. The salts pseudoephedrine hydrochloride and pseudoephedrine sulfate are found in many over-the-counter preparations either as single ingredient preparations, or more commonly in combination with antihistamines, paracetamol and/or ibuprofen. Consumers often refer to it by a product which contains pseudoephedrine, such as Sudafed, the trademark for a common brand of pseudoephedrine hydrochloride in North America; Pseudoephedrine is a phenethylamine, and an isomer of ephedrine. Pseudoephedrine is the International Nonproprietary Name (INN) of the (1S,2S)- diastereomer of ephedrine (which has 1R,2S- configuration). Other names are (+)-pseudoephedrine and D-pseudoephedrine. (Reynolds, 1989) (-)-(1R,2R)-Pseudoephedrine is not used clinically, since it is associated with greater central nervous system (CNS) stimulatory effects. (+)-(1S,2S)-Pseudoephedrine is a less-potent CNS stimulant, yet it retains its efficacy as a decongestant. -- Wikipedia; Pseudoephedrine is a sympathomimetic amine - that is, its principal mechanism of action relies on its indirect action on the adrenergic receptor system. While it may have weak agonist activity at adrenergic receptors, the principal mechanism is to displace noradrenaline from storage vesicles in presynaptic neurons. The displaced noradrenaline is released into the neuronal synapse where it is free to activate the aforementioned postsynaptic adrenergic receptors. -- Wikipedia; Pseudoephedrine is a phenethylamine, and an isomer of ephedrine.| Pseudoephedrine is the International Nonproprietary Name (INN) of the (1S,2S)- diastereomer of ephedrine (which has 1R,2S- configuration). Other names are (+)-pseudoephedrine and D-pseudoephedrine (Reynolds, 1989). The enantiomer (-)-(1R,2R)-Pseudoephedrine has fewer side-effects, fewer central nervous system (CNS) stimulatory effects, does not reduce to d-methamphetamine, yet retains its efficacy as a decongestant.[citation needed] However, the patent holder for (-)-Pseudoephedrine (Pfizer/Warner-Lambert) has not yet sought or received government approval for its sale to the public.(US Patent 6,495,529); Treatment for urinary incontinence is an unlabeled use for these medications. Unlabeled use means doctors can use the medication to treat a condition other than that for which it was first approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). These medications are approved by the FDA for the treatment of nasal congestion caused by colds or allergies. However it has also been succesful in treating stress incontinence by increasing the pressure (tension) exerted by the muscles of the bladder neck and the urethra, which helps retain the urine within the bladder; An alpha and beta adrenergic agonist that may also enhance release of norepinephrine. It has been used in the treatment of several disorders including asthma, heart failure, rhinitis, and urinary incontinence, and for its central nervous system stimulatory effects in the treatment of narcolepsy and depression. It has become less extensively used with the advent of more selective agonists; Pseudoephedrine is a sympathomimetic amine commonly used as a decongestant.| The salts pseudoephedrine hydrochloride and pseudoephedrine sulfate are found in many over-the-counter preparations either as single-ingredient preparations, or more commonly in combination with antihistamines, paracetamol and/or ibuprofen. It is often referred to by consumers as Sudafed, which is the trademark for a common brand of pseudoephedrine hydrochloride. -- Wikipedia; Pseudoephedrine is a sympathomimetic amine - that is, its principal mechanism of action relies on its indirect action on the adrenergic receptor system. While it may have weak agonist activity at alpha and beta adrenergic receptors, the principal mechanism is to displace noradrenaline from storage vesicles in presynaptic neurons. The displaced noradrenaline is released into the neuronal synapse where it is free to activate the aforementioned postsynaptic adrenergic receptors.|
HMDB0000239::The 4-methanol form of vitamin B6 which is converted to pyridoxal phosphate which is a coenzyme for synthesis of amino acids, neurotransmitters (serotonin, norepinephrine), sphingolipids, aminolevulinic acid. Although pyridoxine and Vitamin B6 are still frequently used as synonyms, especially by medical researchers, this practice is erroneous and sometimes misleading (EE Snell; Ann NY Acad Sci, vol 585 pg 1, 1990). Pyridoxine is one of the compounds that can be called vitamin B6. Pyridoxine assists in the balancing of sodium and potassium as well as promoting red blood cell production. It is linked to cancer immunity and helps fight the formation of homocysteine. It has been suggested that Pyridoxine might help children with learning difficulties, and may also prevent dandruff, eczema, and psoriasis. In addition, pyridoxine can help balance hormonal changes in women and aid in immune system. Lack of pyridoxine may cause anemia, nerve damage, seizures, skin problems, and sores in the mouth. -- Wikipedia Deficiency, though rare because of widespread distribution in foods, leads to the development of peripheral neuritis in adults and affects the central nervous system in children (DOSE - 3rd edition). Pyridoxine in the urine is a biomarker for the consumption of soy products.|
HMDB0039229::Pyro-L-glutaminyl-L-glutamine, also known as 5-oxoprolylglutamine or L-p-glu-L-GLN, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as dipeptides. These are organic compounds containing a sequence of exactly two alpha-amino acids joined by a peptide bond. Pyro-L-glutaminyl-L-glutamine exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Pyro-L-glutaminyl-L-glutamine has been primarily detected in saliva. Within the cell, pyro-L-glutaminyl-L-glutamine is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Outside of the human body, pyro-L-glutaminyl-L-glutamine can be found in fruits. This makes pyro-L-glutaminyl-L-glutamine a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product.|
HMDB0015044::An optical isomer of quinine, extracted from the bark of the Cinchona tree and similar plant species. This alkaloid dampens the excitability of cardiac and skeletal muscles by blocking sodium and potassium currents across cellular membranes. It prolongs cellular action potential, and decreases automaticity. Quinidine also blocks muscarinic and alpha-adrenergic neurotransmission. [PubChem]|
HMDB0240252::Salicyluric beta-D-glucuronide, also known as 1-O-salicyluroyl-beta-D-glucuronate or 1-O-[N-(2-hydroxybenzoyl)glycyl]-beta-D-glucronate, is a member of the class of compounds known as O-glucuronides. O-glucuronides are glucuronides in which the aglycone is linked to the carbohydrate unit through an O-glycosidic bond. Salicyluric beta-D-glucuronide is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa).|
HMDB0006088::scyllo-Inositol or scyllitol is an inositol isoform. Inositol is a derivative of cyclohexane with six hydroxyl groups, making it a polyol. It also is known as a sugar alcohol, having exactly the same molecular formula as glucose or other hexoses. Inositol exists in nine possible stereoisomers, including scyllo-inositol, myo-inositol (the most abundant), muco-inositol, D-chiro-inositol, L-chiro-inositol, neo-inositol, allo-inositol, epi-inositol, and cis-inositol. scyllo-Inositol was first isolated from the kidneys of fish in 1858 by Staedeler and Freierchs. scyllo-Inositol is a naturally occurring plant sugar alcohol found most abundantly in the coconut palm. It appears to accumulate in a number of human tissues and biofluids through dietary consumption. It has traditionally been considered to be a B vitamin although it has an uncertain status as a vitamin and a deficiency syndrome has not been identified in man. (From Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th ed, p1379). Results reported by Viola et al (PMID: 15340856  ) suggest that high CSF concentrations of scyllo-inositol can be induced by chronic alcoholism. scyllo-Inositol when fed to transgenic mice that exhibit a memory disease very similar to human Alzheimer's disease, can block the accumulation of soluble amyloid-beta (Aβ) plaques in the brain. scyllo-Inositol was found to reverse memory deficits in the mice, reduce the amount of Aβ plaque in the brains of the mice, and reversed other symptoms associated with the presence of Aβ in the brain (PMID: 16767098  ).|
HMDB0032616::Sinapic acid, also known as sinapinATE, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as hydroxycinnamic acids. Hydroxycinnamic acids are compounds containing an cinnamic acid where the benzene ring is hydroxylated. Sinapic acid exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Sinapic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, sinapic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Sinapic acid is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, sinapoyltartronic acid, O-sinapoylglucaric acid, and 7-O-(6-sinapoylglucosyl)isoorientin. Sinapic acid is an odorless tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as cardoon, naranjilla, swede, and green zucchini. This makes sinapic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0001266::D-Tagatose, also known as D-lyxo-2-hexulose or D-tag, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as monosaccharides. Monosaccharides are compounds containing one carbohydrate unit not glycosidically linked to another such unit, and no set of two or more glycosidically linked carbohydrate units. Monosaccharides have the general formula CnH2nOn. D-Tagatose exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). D-Tagatose has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as saliva and blood. D-Tagatose can be converted into keto-D-tagatose 1,6-bisphosphate and keto-D-tagatose 6-phosphate. |
HMDB0062559::stearoyl sphingomyelin, also known as 2,3-(N-Steroylsphingosyl)-1-phosphocholine or 2,3-SPPC, is classified as a member of the Phosphosphingolipids. Phosphosphingolipids are sphingolipids with a structure based on a sphingoid base that is attached to a phosphate head group. They differ from phosphonospingolipids which have a phosphonate head group. stearoyl sphingomyelin is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and acidic.  stearoyl sphingomyelin is a phosphosphingolipid lipid molecule|
HMDB0000937::Stigmasterol is a phytosterol, meaning it is steroid derived from plants. As a food additive, phytosterols have cholesterol-lowering properties (reducing cholesterol absorption in intestines), and may act in cancer prevention. Phytosterols naturally occur in small amount in vegetable oils, especially soybean oil. One such phytosterol complex, isolated from vegetable oil, is cholestatin, composed of campesterol, stigmasterol, and brassicasterol, and is marketed as a dietary supplement. Sterols can reduce cholesterol in human subjects by up to 15%. The mechanism behind phytosterols and the lowering of cholesterol occurs as follows : the incorporation of cholesterol into micelles in the gastrointestinal tract is inhibited, decreasing the overall amount of cholesterol absorbed. This may in turn help to control body total cholesterol levels, as well as modify HDL, LDL and TAG levels. Many margarines, butters, breakfast cereals and spreads are now enriched with phytosterols and marketed towards people with high cholesterol and a wish to lower it (Wikipedia). Stigmasterol is found to be associated with phytosterolemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0002085::Syringic acid is a phenol present in some distilled alcohol beverages. It is also a product of microbial (gut) metabolism of anthocyanins and other polyphenols that have been consumed (in fruits and alcoholic beverages - PMID: 18767860  ). Research suggests that phenolics from wine may play a positive role against oxidation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL), which is a key step in the development of atherosclerosis. Syringic acid is correlated with high antioxidant activity and inhibition of LDL oxidation. (PMID 15545043  ).|
HMDB0000722::Lithocholyltaurine is a bile salt formed in the liver from lithocholic acid conjugation with taurine, usually as the sodium salt. It solubilizes fats for absorption and is itself absorbed. Lithocholic acid, a hydrophobic secondary bile acid, is well known to cause intrahepatic cholestasis. There have been extensive studies on the mechanisms of lithocholate-induced cholestasis in animals. Lithocholate diminishes both the bile acid-dependent and independent bile flow. In humans, elevated levels of lithocholic acid are found in patients with chronic cholestatic liver disease. Lithocholyltaurine impairs both the bile canalicular contractions and the canalicular bile secretion, possibly by acting directly on the canalicular membranes in lithocholyltaurine-induced cholestasis. Lithocholyltaurine induce acute cholestasis-associated with retrieval of the bile salt export pump. The bile salt export pump (BSEP) of hepatocyte secretes conjugated bile salts across the canalicular membrane in an ATP-dependent manner. Hepatic retention of bile acids may lead to liver injury by hepatocyte apoptosis and eventually deterioration of cholestatic liver diseases. One mechanism of induced apoptosis by lithocholyltaurine is the induction of transcriptional activity of AP-1 (activation protein-1). (PMID: 16981261  , 15763547  , 16332456  , 18164257  ).|
HMDB0002580::Taurolithocholic acid 3-sulfate is a sulfated bile acid. Under normal circumstances, bile acid sulfation is a minor pathway. However in the presence of cholestasis, the fraction of the bile acid pool which is sulfated increases. Sulfation of bile acids increases the aqueous solubility of the amphipathic compounds and results in more efficient renal clearance as well as in decreased reabsorption from the intestinal lumen. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ).|
HMDB0062720::Thymol sulfate belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenylsulfates. Phenylsulfates are compounds containing a sulfuric acid group conjugated to a phenyl group. Thymol sulfate can be converted into thymol. |
HMDB0001160::Tricosylic acid, also known as N-tricosanoate or tricosylate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as very long-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains at least 22 carbon atoms. Tricosylic acid exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Tricosylic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as blood and urine. Within the cell, tricosylic acid is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP), cytoplasm and adiposome. Tricosylic acid is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, beta-D-galactosyl-N-(tricosanoyl)sphingosine, beta-D-galactosyl-(1->4)-beta-D-glucosyl-(11)-N-tricosanoylsphingosine, and N-(tricosanoyl)-[(4E,6E)-tetradecasphingadienine]-1-phosphoethanolamine. Outside of the human body, tricosylic acid can be found in citrus, date, and papaya. This makes tricosylic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0029090::Tryptophyl-Phenylalanine is a dipeptide composed of tryptophan and phenylalanine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029094::Tryptophyl-Tryptophan is a dipeptied compoosed of two tryptophan residues. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029095::Tryptophyl-Tyrosine is a dipeptide composed of tryptophan and tyrosine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0004158::Urobilinogen is a colourless product of bilirubin reduction. It is formed in the intestines by bacterial action. Some urobilinogen is reabsorbed, taken up by the hepatocytes into the circulation and excreted by the kidney. This constitutes the normal "intrahepatic urobilinogen cycle". Increased amounts of bilirubin are formed in haemolysis which generates increased urobilinogen in the gut. In liver disease (such as hepatitis) the intrahepatic urobilinogen cycle is inhibited also increasing urobilinogen levels. Urobilinogen is converted to the yellow pigmented urobilin apparent in urine. The urobilinogen remaining in the intestine (stercobilinogen) is oxidized to brown stercobilin which gives the feces their characteristic color. In biliary obstruction, below normal amounts of conjugated bilirubin reach the intestine for conversion to urobilinogen. With limited urobilinogen available for reabsorption and excretion, the amount of urobilin found in the urine is low.|
HMDB0002395::Ursolic acid is a ubiquitous triterpenoid in plant kingdom, medicinal herbs, and is an integral part of the human diet. During the last decade over 700 research articles have been published on triterpenoids research, reflecting tremendous interest and progress in our understanding of these compounds. This included the isolation and purification of these tritepernoids from various plants and herbs, the chemical modifications to make more effective and water soluble derivatives, the pharmacological research on their beneficial effects, the toxicity studies, and the clinical use of these triterpenoids in various diseases including anticancer chemotherapies. Ursolic acid (UA), a pentacyclic triterpene acid, has been isolated from many kinds of medicinal plants, such as Eriobotrya japonica, Rosmarinns officinalis, Melaleuca leucadendron, Ocimum sanctum and Glechoma hederaceae. UA has been reported to produce antitumor activities and antioxidant activity, and is reported to have an antioxidant activity. UA may play an important role in regulating the apoptosis induced by high glucose presumably through scavenging of ROS (reactive oxygen species). It has been found recently that ursolic acid treatment affects growth and apoptosis in cancer cells. (PMID: 15994040  , 17516235  , 17213663  ).|
HMDB0029121::Valyl-Arginine is a dipeptide composed of valine and arginine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0000484::Vanillic acid is a phenolic acid found in some forms of vanilla and many other plant extracts. It is a flavoring and scent agent that produces a pleasant, creamy odor. It is the intermediate product in the two-step bioconversion of ferulic acid to vanillin. (J Biotechnol 1996;50(2-3):107-13). Vanillic acid, which is a chlorogenic acid, is an oxidized form of vanillin. It is also an intermediate in the production of vanillin from ferulic acid. Vanillic acid is a metabolic byproduct of caffeic acid and is often found in the urine of humans who have consumed coffee, chocolate, tea and vanilla-flavored confectionary. Vanillic acid selectively and specifically inhibits 5'nucleotidase activity. (PMID: 16899266  ).|
HMDB0012308::Vanillin is the primary component of the extract of the vanilla bean. Synthetic vanillin, instead of natural vanilla extract, is sometimes used as a flavouring agent in foods, beverages, and pharmaceuticals. It is used by the food industry as well as ethylvanillin.Artificial vanilla flavoring is a solution of pure vanillin, usually of synthetic origin. Because of the scarcity and expense of natural vanilla extract, there has long been interest in the synthetic preparation of its predominant component. The first commercial synthesis of vanillin began with the more readily available natural compound eugenol. Today, artificial vanillin is made from either guaiacol or from lignin, a constituent of wood which is a byproduct of the paper industry. (Wiki).|
HMDB0000299::Biological Source: Xanthosine is produced by guanine-free mutants of bacteria e.g. Bacillus subtilis, Aerobacter aerogenes. Also reported from seeds of Trifolium alexandrinum Physical Description: Prismatic cryst. (H2O) (Chemnetbase) The deamination product of guanosine. Xanthosine monophosphate is an intermediate in purine metabolism, formed from IMP, and forming GMP.(Wikipedia). Xanthylic acid can be used in quantitative measurements of the Inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase enzyme activities in purine metabolism, as recommended to ensure optimal thiopurine therapy for children with acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL). (PMID: 16725387  ).|
HMDB0000881::Xanthurenic acid, also known as xanthurenate or 8-hydroxykynurenic acid, is a member of the class of compounds known as quinoline carboxylic acids. Quinoline carboxylic acids are quinolines in which the quinoline ring system is substituted by a carboxyl group at one or more positions. Xanthurenic acid is slightly soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). Xanthurenic acid can be found primarily in blood, feces, and urine, as well as in human epidermis tissue. Within the cell, xanthurenic acid is primarily located in the membrane. Xanthurenic acid exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. In humans, xanthurenic acid is involved in the tryptophan metabolism. Moreover, xanthurenic acid is found to be associated with citrullinemia type I, which is an inborn error of metabolism. Xanthurenic acid is a metabolite from tryptophan catabolism. It is a substrate of the enzyme methyltransferases (EC 2.1.1.-) in pathway tryptophan metabolism (KEGG).|
HMDB0001644::D-xylulose is a monosaccharide containing five carbon atoms. D-xylulose is converted from xylitol by the enzyme NAD+-linked xylitol dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.9) in the glucuronate pathway, the most important xylitol-handling metabolic pathway in mammals. This activity has been described in human erythrocytes. Most likely, D-xylulose (as well as D-arabinose or D-ribulose) is a precursor of the pentiol D-arabitol, since pentitols are derived from their corresponding pentose phosphate precursors via pentoses. This pathway can play a role in inherited metabolic disorders underlying the accumulation of pentitols e.g., ribose 5-phosphate isomerase deficiency and transaldolase deficiency. Although pentitols are present in all living organisms, knowledge concerning their metabolism is limited (PMID: 15234337  , Mol Genet Metab. 2004 Jul;82(3):231-7.).|
HMDB0004666::2-Arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) is a unique molecular species of monoacylglycerol isolated in 1995 from rat brain and canine gut as an endogenous ligand for the cannabinoid receptors. 2-AG is rapidly formed from arachidonic acid-containing phospholipids through increased phospholipid metabolism, such as enhanced inositol phospholipid turnover, in various tissues and cells upon stimulation. 2-AG binds to the cannabinoid receptors (CB1 and CB2) and exhibits a variety of cannabimimetic activities in vitro and in vivo. 2-Arachidonylglycerol is an endogenous cannabinoid (endocannabinoid). Endocannabinoids are a class of fatty acid derivatives defined by their ability to interact with the specific cannabinoid receptors that were originally identified as the targets of Delta9-tetrahydocannabinol (Delta9-THC), the psychoactive component of cannabis. Endocannabinoids have been implicated in a growing number of important physiological and behavioral events. Endocannabinoids are amides, esters and ethers of long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids, which act as new lipidic mediators. 2-AG is one of the main endogenous agonists of cannabinoid receptors, able to mimic several pharmacological effects of (-)-Delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the active principle of Cannabis sativa preparations like hashish and marijuana. The activity of AEA and 2-AG at their receptors is limited by cellular uptake through an anandamide membrane transporter (AMT), followed by intracellular degradation. A fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) is the main AEA hydrolase, whereas a monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL) is critical in degrading 2-AG. (PMID: 16515464  , 16278487  , 16678907  )|
HMDB0011530::MG(0:0/14:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011531::MG(0:0/14:1(9Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011532::MG(0:0/15:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011534::MG(0:0/16:1(9Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011536::MG(0:0/18:1(11Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011537::MG(0:0/18:1(9Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011539::MG(0:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011540::MG(0:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011541::MG(0:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011542::MG(0:0/20:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011543::MG(0:0/20:1(11Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011544::MG(0:0/20:2(11Z,14Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011546::MG(0:0/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011547::MG(0:0/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011549::MG(0:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011550::MG(0:0/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011551::MG(0:0/22:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011552::MG(0:0/22:1(13Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011553::MG(0:0/22:2(13Z,16Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011554::MG(0:0/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011555::MG(0:0/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011556::MG(0:0/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011557::MG(0:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011558::MG(0:0/24:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011559::MG(0:0/24:1(15Z)/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011561::MG(14:0/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011562::MG(14:1(9Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011563::MG(15:0/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011565::MG(16:1(9Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011566::MG(18:1(11Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011570::MG(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011571::MG(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011572::MG(20:0/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011573::MG(20:1(11Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011574::MG(20:2(11Z,14Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011576::MG(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011577::MG(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011578::MG(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011579::MG(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011580::MG(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011581::MG(22:0/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011582::MG(22:1(13Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011583::MG(22:2(13Z,16Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011584::MG(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011585::MG(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011586::MG(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011587::MG(22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011588::MG(24:0/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0011589::MG(24:1(15Z)/0:0/0:0) is a monoacylglyceride. A monoglyceride, more correctly known as a monoacylglycerol, is a glyceride consisting of one fatty acid chain covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through an ester linkage. Monoacylglycerol can be broadly divided into two groups; 1-monoacylglycerols (or 3-monoacylglycerols) and 2-monoacylglycerols, depending on the position of the ester bond on the glycerol moiety. Normally the 1-/3-isomers are not distinguished from each other and are termed 'alpha-monoacylglycerols', while the 2-isomers are beta-monoacylglycerols. Monoacylglycerols are formed biochemically via release of a fatty acid from diacylglycerol by diacylglycerol lipase or hormone sensitive lipase. Monoacylglycerols are broken down by monoacylglycerol lipase. They tend to be minor components only of most plant and animal tissues, and indeed would not be expected to accumulate because their strong detergent properties would have a disruptive effect on membranes. 2-Monoacylglycerols are a major end product of the intestinal digestion of dietary fats in animals via the enzyme pancreatic lipase. They are taken up directly by the intestinal cells and converted to triacylglycerols via the monoacylglycerol pathway before being transported in lymph to the liver. Mono- and Diglycerides are commonly added to commercial food products in small quantities. They act as emulsifiers, helping to mix ingredients such as oil and water that would not otherwise blend well.|
HMDB0000016::11-Deoxycorticosterone (also called desoxycortone, 21-hydroxyprogesterone, DOC, or simply deoxycorticosterone) is a steroid hormone produced by the adrenal gland that possesses mineralocorticoid activity and acts as a precursor to aldosterone. It is classified as a member of the 21-hydroxysteroids. 21-hydroxysteroids are steroids carrying a hydroxyl group at the 21-position of the steroid backbone. Deoxycorticosterone is very hydrophobic, practically insoluble (in water), and relatively neutral. Deoxycorticosterone can be synthesized from progesterone by 21-beta-hydroxylase and is then converted to corticosterone by 11-beta-hydroxylase. Corticosterone is then converted to aldosterone by aldosterone synthase. Deoxycorticosterone stimulates the collecting tubules in the kidney to continue to excrete potassium in much the same way that aldosterone does. Deoxycorticosterone has about 1/20 of the sodium retaining power of aldosterone and about 1/5 the potassium excreting power of aldosterone (Wikipedia). Deoxycorticosterone can be found throughout all human tissues and has been detected in amniotic fluid and blood. When present in sufficiently high levels, deoxycorticosterone can act as a hypertensive agent and a metabotoxin. A hypertensive agent increases blood pressure and causes the production of more urine. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels.  Chronically high levels of deoxycorticosterone are associated with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) and with adrenal tumors producing deoxycorticosterone (PMID: 20671982  ). High levels of this mineralocorticoid are associated with resistant hypertension, which can result in polyuria, polydipsia, increased blood volume, edema, and cardiac enlargement. Deoxycorticosterone can be used to treat adrenal insufficiency. In particular, desoxycorticosterone acetate (DOCA) is used as replacement therapy in Addison's disease.|
HMDB0000315::16-alpha-hydroxypregnenolone, also known as (3beta,16alpha)-3,16-dihydroxypregn-5-en-20-one, is classified as a gluco/mineralocorticoid, a progestogin or aprogestogin derivative. Gluco/mineralocorticoids are steroids with a structure based on a hydroxylated prostane moiety. Thus, 16-alpha-hydroxypregnenolone is a steroid lipid molecule. 16-alpha-hydroxypregnenolone is practically insoluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 16-alpha-hydroxypregnenolone can be found primarily in blood, urine and in human umbilical cord tissue. Within the cell, 16-alpha-hydroxypregnenolone is primarily located in the membrane, and in the nucleus bound to cytoplasmic glucocorticoid receptors. 16-alpha-hydroxypregnenolone exists in all vertebrates. 16-a-Hydroxypregnenolone is a normal urinary metabolite with increased total excretion in newborn infants with congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (PMID 6980322  ).|
HMDB0000164::Methylamine occurs endogenously from amine catabolism and its tissue levels increase in some pathological conditions, including diabetes. Interestingly, methylamine and ammonia levels are reciprocally controlled by a semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase activity that deaminates methylamine to formaldehyde with the production of ammonia and hydrogen peroxide. Methylamine also targets the voltage-operated neuronal potassium channels, probably inducing release of neurotransmitter(s). Semicarbazide-sensitive amine oxidase (SSAO) catalyzes the deamination of primary amines. Such deamination has been shown capable of regulating glucose transport in adipose cells. It has been independently discovered that the primary structure of vascular adhesion protein-1 (VAP-1) is identical to SSAO. Increased serum SSAO activities have been found in patients with diabetic mellitus, vascular disorders, and Alzheimer's disease. The SSAO-catalyzed deamination of endogenous substrates like methylamine led to production of toxic formaldehyde. Chronic elevated methylamine increases the excretion of malondialdehyde and microalbuminuria. Amine oxidase substrates such as methylamine have been shown to stimulate glucose uptake by increasing the recruitment of the glucose transporter GLUT4 from vesicles within the cell to the cell surface. Inhibition of this effect by the presence of semicarbazide and catalase led to the suggestion that the process is mediated by the hydrogen peroxide produced in the oxidation of these amines (PMID: 16049393  , 12686132  , 17406961  ).|
HMDB0000906::Trimethylamine, also known as NMe3, N(CH3)3, and TMA, is a colorless, hygroscopic, and flammable simple amine with a typical fishy odor in low concentrations and an ammonia like odor in higher concentrations. Trimethylamine has a boiling point of 2.9 degree centigrade and is a gas at room temperature. Trimethylamine usually comes in pressurized gas cylinders or as a 40% solution in water. Trimethylamine is a nitrogenous base and its positively charged cation is called trimethylammonium cation. A common salt of trimethylamine is trimethylammonium chloride, a hygroscopic colorless solid (Wikipedia). Trimethylamine is a product of decomposition of plants and animals. It is the substance mainly responsible for the fishy odor often associated with fouling fish, bacterial vagina infections, and bad breath. It is also associated with taking large doses of choline (Wikipedia). Trimethylaminuria is a genetic disorder in which the body is unable to metabolize trimethylamine from food sources. Patients develop a characteristic fish odour of their sweat, urine, and breath after the consumption of choline-rich foods. Trimethylaminuria is an autosomal recessive disorder involving a trimethylamine oxidase deficiency. Trimethylaminuria has also been observed in a certain breed of Rhode Island Red chicken that produces eggs with a fishy smell (Wikipedia). Trimethylamine in the urine is a biomarker for the consumption of legumes.|
HMDB0031206::Pentanal is found in alcoholic beverages. Pentanal is found in olive oil and several essential oils. Also present in Bantu beer, plum brandy, cardamom, coriander leaf, rice, Bourbon vanilla, clary sage, cooked shrimps, scallops, apple, banana, sweet cherry, blackcurrant and other food|
HMDB0003366::In organic chemistry, propanal or propionaldehyde is the aldehyde of the 3 carbon propyl group. It has a chemical formula of CH3CH2CHO, and is a structural isomer of propanone. At room temperature, it is a colourless liquid with a slightly irritating, fruity odour.|
HMDB0039843::S-Methyl 3-methylthiobutyrate is found in fruits. S-Methyl 3-methylthiobutyrate is produced by micrococaceae and coryneform bacteria isolated from cheeses. Also in hop oil, honeydew melon, galbanum oil and (tentatively) cantaloupes. S-Methyl 3-methylthiobutyrate is a flavouring ingredient.|
HMDB0000990::Acetaldehyde is a colorless, flammable liquid used in the manufacture of acetic acid, perfumes, and flavors. It is also an intermediate in the metabolism of alcohol. It has a general narcotic action and also causes irritation of mucous membranes. Large doses may cause death from respiratory paralysis. Small amounts of acetaldehyde are produced naturally through gut microbial fermentation. Acetaldehyde is produced through the action of alcohol dehydrogenase on ethanol and is somewhate more toxic than ethanol. Acetaldehyde is linked to most of the negative clinical effects of alcohol. It has been shown to increase the risk of developing cirrhosis of the liver, multiple forms of cancer, and alcoholism. Acetaldehyde is found to be associated with aldehyde dehydrogenase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0002714::Methane (CH4), is a gas produced by a group of colonic anaerobes, absorbed from the colon and excreted in expired air. As a result, breath CH4 excretion can be used as an indicator of the in situ activity of the methanogenic flora. All CH4 produced in human beings is a metabolic product of intestinal bacteria, and about 50% of CH4 produced in the gut is absorbed and excreted in expired air. Because there appears to be no catabolism of this gas by other colonic organisms or host cells, breath CH4 measurements provide a rapid, simple means of semi quantitatively assessing the ongoing in situ metabolism of the methanogenic flora. It could seem likely that the intracolonic activity of a variety of bacteria similarly might be assessed quantitatively via analysis of expired air. However, the application of this methodology has been confounded by the rapid catabolism of many volatile bacterial products by other bacteria or human tissue.| A striking aspect of the studies of breath CH4 measurements is the enormous individual variations in the excretion of this gas. Virtually all children under 5 years of age and 66% of the adult population do not exhale appreciable quantities of CH4. The remaining 34% of the adult population has appreciable breath methane concentrations of up to 80 ppm (mean, 15.2 ppm; median, 11.8 ppm). On this basis the population can be divided into CH4 producers or nonproducers, although a more accurate term would be to define subjects as being low or high CH4 producers. The primary methanogen present in the human colon, Methanobrevibacter smithii, produces methane via a reaction that relies entirely on H2 produced by other organisms to reduce CO2 to CH4. Thus, breath CH4 concentrations might be expected to mirror breath H2 concentrations; however, the high levels of CH4 observed in the fasting state may result from H2 derived from endogenous rather than dietary substrates. A diverse assortment of conditions has been associated with a high prevalence of methane producers including diverticulosis, cystic fibrosis, high fasting serum cholesterol levels, encopresis in children, and aorto-iliac vascular disease, whereas obesity (measured as skin-fold thickness) was related inversely to methane production. The challenge that remains is to determine to what extent methanogens actively influence body physiology vs. simply serve as passive indicators of colonic function. (PMID: 16469670  , Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology Volume 4, Issue 2, February 2006, Pages 123-129).|
HMDB0003227::Methanethiol (also known as methyl mercaptan) is a colorless gas that smells like rotten cabbage. It is a natural substance found in the blood, brain, and other tissues of people and animals. It is released from animal feces. It occurs naturally in certain foods, such as some nuts and cheese. It is also one of the main chemicals responsible for bad breath and flatulence. At very high concentrations methanethiol is highly toxic and affects the central nervous system. The chemical formula for methanethiol is CH3SH; it is classified as a thiol. Methanethiol is also considered to be a weak acid, with a pKa of ~10.4. This acidic property makes it reactive with dissolved metals in aqueous solutions. The environmental chemistry of these interactions in seawater or fresh water environments such as lakes has yet to be fully investigated. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0003315::Cyclohexanone is a colorless oily liquid with an odor resembling acetone and peppermint. Cyclohexanone is occasionally found as a volatile component of human urine. Biological fluids such as blood and urine have been shown to contain a large number of components, some of them volatiles (low boiling point) apparently present in all individuals, while others such are much more variable. In some cases differences up to an order of magnitude are observed. Although some of these changes may have dietary origins, others seem to be characteristic of the individual.| Cyclohexanone is obtained through oxidation of cyclohexane or dehydrogenation of phenol. Approx. 95% of its manufacturing is used for the production of nylon. Information on toxicity to human beings is fragmentary. Acute exposure is characterized by irritation of the eyes, nose, and throat. In two persons, drowsiness and renal impairment were found; however, these workers were also exposed to other compounds. Hepatic disorders were found in a group of workers exposed for over five years. In animals, cyclohexanone is characterized by relatively low acute toxicity (DL50 by intragastric administration is approximately 2 g/kg body wt.). Effects on the central nervous system (CNS) were found (narcosis), as well as irritation of the eyes and skin. Following multiple administration, effects were found in the CNS, liver, and kidneys as well as irritation of the conjunctiva. Mutagenic and genotoxic effects were found, but no teratogenic effects were detected; however, there were embryotoxic effects and influence on reproduction Cyclohexanone is well absorbed through the skin, respiratory tract, and alimentary tract. The main metabolic pathway leads to cyclohexanol, which is excreted in urine coupled with glucuronic acid. A high correlation was found between the concentration of cyclohexanone in the working environment and its concentration in urine. Cyclohexanone is formed from the hydrocarbons cyclohexane and 1-, 2-, and 3-hexanol. A patient's case report documents the development of anosmia (an olfactory disorder) and rhinitis caused by occupational exposure to organic solvents, including cyclohexanone (PMID: 10476412  , 16925936  , 16477465  ).|
HMDB0003543::Butanal is an organic compound that is the aldehyde analog of butane. It is a colorless flammable liquid with an acrid smell. It is miscible with most organic solvents.(wikipedia). IN man, butanal is a biomarker for oxidative damage to lipids, proteins and DNA. (PubMed ID 15763951 ).|
HMDB0012971::1-Hexanol is an organic alcohol with a six carbon chain and a condensed structural formula of CH3(CH2)5OH. This colorless liquid is slightly soluble in water, but miscible with ether and ethanol. Two additional straight chain isomers of 1-hexanol exist, 2-hexanol and 3-hexanol, both of which differ by the location of the hydroxyl group. Many isomeric alcohols have the formula C6H13OH. 1-hexanol is believed to be a component of the odour of freshly mown grass. It is used in the perfume industry.|
HMDB0013785::Furan is a colorless, flammable, highly volatile liquid with a boiling point close to room temperature. It is soluble in common organic solvents, including alcohol, ether and acetone, but is insoluble in water. It is toxic and may be carcinogenic. Furan is used as a starting point to other specialty chemicals. Furan is a heterocyclic organic compound, consisting of a five-membered aromatic ring with four carbon atoms and one oxygen. The class of compounds containing such rings are also referred to as furans. Furan is aromatic because one of the lone pairs of electrons on the oxygen atom is delocalized into the ring, creating a 4n+2 aromatic system (see Huckel's rule) similar to benzene. Because of the aromaticity, the molecule is flat and lacks discrete double bonds. The other lone pair of electrons of the oxygen atom extends in the plane of the flat ring system. The sp2 hybridization is to allow one of the lone pairs of oxygen to reside in a p orbital and thus allow it to interact within the pi-system. The Feist-Benary synthesis is a classic way to synthesize furans, although many syntheses have been developed. One of the simplest synthesis methods for furans is the reaction of 1,4-diketones with phosphorus pentoxide (P2O5) in the Paal-Knorr Synthesis. The thiophene formation reaction of 1,4-diketones with Lawesson's reagent also forms furans as side products. 2,4-Disubstituted furans can be synthesized by sulfone-mediated cyclization of 1,3-diketones|
HMDB0029597::Cyclohexane, also known as hexahydrobenzene or hexamethylene, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as cycloalkanes. These are saturated monocyclic hydrocarbons (with or without side chains). Cyclohexane exists as a liquid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Cyclohexane has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, cyclohexane is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). Cyclohexane is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, 1-ethyl-2-propylcyclohexane, trans-4-tert-butylcyclohexanecarboxylic acid, and chlorocyclohexane. Outside of the human body, cyclohexane can be found in kohlrabi. This makes cyclohexane a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product. Cyclohexane is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0029600::Hexane is found in citrus. Hexane is an extraction solvent used in food production Present in volatile fractions of various plant species e.g. apples, orange juice, guava fruit, roasted filberts, porcini (Boletus edulis), shiitake (Lentinus edodes), heated sweet potato and sage. Also present in scallop|
HMDB0029641::p-Mentha-1,3,5,8-tetraene is found in citrus. p-Mentha-1,3,5,8-tetraene occurs in Chamaecyparis, Citrus, Eucalyptus, Juniperus and Ribes species oils and juices. p-Mentha-1,3,5,8-tetraene is a flavouring ingredien|
HMDB0029728::2-Ethyl-5-methylfuran, also known as furan, 2-methyl, 5-ethyl, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as heteroaromatic compounds. Heteroaromatic compounds are compounds containing an aromatic ring where a carbon atom is linked to an hetero atom. 2-Ethyl-5-methylfuran is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). 2-Ethyl-5-methylfuran has been primarily detected in feces. 2-Ethyl-5-methylfuran exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans.|
HMDB0031317::Bis(methylthio)methane is found in animal foods. Bis(methylthio)methane is a odorous constituent of white truffle (Tuber magnatum); volatile component of some cheeses and boiled beef aroma. Also found in milk, fish oils, shitake mushroom, truffles, prawns and lobster. Bis(methylthio)methane is an important off-flavour component of foods. Bis(methylthio)methane is used in seasonings 2,4-Dithiapentane is an organic compound known to be an important component of truffle flavor. It is used as a primary aromatic ingredient in truffle oil when combined in an olive oil base|
HMDB0031872::Methyl propyl disulfide is found in animal foods. Methyl propyl disulfide is a constituent of chive (Allium schoenoprasum) and other Allium species Methyl propyl disulfide is a flavouring component of onion oil. Also present in cooked cabbage, French fried potato, cooked beef, roasted peanut, brussel sprouts and tomato|
HMDB0032076::1-Methoxy-4-methylbenzene is found in garden tomato. 1-Methoxy-4-methylbenzene is isolated from ylang-ylang, cananga and other essential oils. Also present in tomato and Camembert cheese. 1-Methoxy-4-methylbenzene is a flavouring ingredien|
HMDB0032980::3,4-Dimethylthiophene belongs to the class of organic compounds known as heteroaromatic compounds. Heteroaromatic compounds are compounds containing an aromatic ring where a carbon atom is linked to an hetero atom. 3,4-Dimethylthiophene is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. 3,4-Dimethylthiophene has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, 3,4-dimethylthiophene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). 3,4-Dimethylthiophene exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Outside of the human body, 3,4-dimethylthiophene can be found in garden onion. This makes 3,4-dimethylthiophene a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product.|
HMDB0033002::5-Methyl-2-furancarboxaldehyde is found in pepper (c. annuum). 5-Methyl-2-furancarboxaldehyde is isolated from brown algae and other plant sources, doubtless as a secondary produced from saccharides. 5-Methyl-2-furancarboxaldehyde is a flavouring ingredient.|
HMDB0033119::3-Methylthiophene, also known as P3MT or 3-thiotolene, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as heteroaromatic compounds. Heteroaromatic compounds are compounds containing an aromatic ring where a carbon atom is linked to an hetero atom. 3-Methylthiophene exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). 3-Methylthiophene has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, 3-methylthiophene is primarily located in the cytoplasm. 3-Methylthiophene exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Outside of the human body, 3-methylthiophene can be found in coffee and coffee products and guava. This makes 3-methylthiophene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0033182::2,5-Dimethylfuran is a maillard product 2,5-Dimethylfuran has been identified as one of the components of cigar smoke with low cilatoxicity (ability to adversely affect the cilia in the respiratory tract that are responsible for removing foreign particles). Its blood concentration can be used as a biomarker for smoking. 2,5-Dimethylfuran, together with 2,5-hexanedione and 4,5-dihydroxy-2-hexanone, is one of the main metabolites of hexane in humans, which play a role in the mechanism for the neurotoxicity of hexane. A derivative of furan, 2,5-dimethylfuran is a heterocyclic compound of the formula C6H8O. While it may be abbreviated DMF, it should not be confused with dimethylformamide. Recent advances have increased its attractiveness as a biofuel.|
HMDB0033910::Acetophenone is found in chicory. Acetophenone is a flavouring ingredient used in fruit flavours; leavening agent Acetophenone is a raw material for the synthesis of some pharmaceuticals and is also listed as an approved excipient by the U.S. FDA. In a 1994 report released by five top cigarette companies in the U.S., acetophenone was listed as one of the 599 additives to cigarettes. Acetophenone is the organic compound with the formula C6H5C(O)CH3. It is the simplest aromatic ketone. This colourless, viscous liquid is a precursor to useful resins and fragrances|
HMDB0035619::alpha-Carene is found in allspice. alpha-Carene is a flavouring ingredient.Carene, or delta-3-carene, is a bicyclic monoterpene which occurs naturally as a constituent of turpentine, with a content as high as 42% depending on the source. Carene has a sweet and pungent odor. It is not soluble in water, but miscible with fats and oils|
HMDB0035850::alpha-Phellandrene is found in allspice. Phellandrene is the name for a pair of organic compounds that have a similar molecular structure and similar chemical properties. alpha-Phellandrene and beta-phellandrene are cyclic monoterpenes and are double-bond isomers. The phellandrenes are used in fragrances because of their pleasing aromas. (Wikipedia|
HMDB0035924::Pyrrole is found in corn. Pyrrole is a flavouring ingredient Pyrrole has very low basicity compared to conventional amines and some other aromatic compounds like pyridine. This decreased basicity is attributed to the delocalization of the lone pair of electrons of the nitrogen atom in the aromatic ring. Pyrrole is a very weak base with a pKaH of about 4. Protonation results in loss of aromaticity, and is, therefore, unfavorable. Pyrrole is a heterocyclic aromatic organic compound, a five-membered ring with the formula C4H4NH. Substituted derivatives are also called pyrroles. For example, C4H4NCH3 is N-methylpyrrole. Porphobilinogen is a trisubstituted pyrrole, which is the biosynthetic precursor to many natural products. The starting materials in the Piloty-Robinson pyrrole synthesis are 2 equivalents of an aldehyde and hydrazine. The product is a pyrrole with specific substituents in the 3 and 4 positions. The aldehyde reacts with the diamine to an intermediate di-imine (R C=N N=C R), which, with added hydrochloric acid, gives ring-closure and loss of ammonia to the pyrrole|
HMDB0041389::Methyl 2-propenyl disulfide, also known as 3-(methyldisulfanyl)-1-propene or methyl allyl disulphide, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as allyl sulfur compounds. Allyl sulfur compounds are compounds containing an allylsulfur group, with the general structure H2C(=CH2)CS. Methyl 2-propenyl disulfide is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Methyl 2-propenyl disulfide has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, methyl 2-propenyl disulfide is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Methyl 2-propenyl disulfide is an alliaceous, garlic, and green tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as chives, allium (onion), onion-family vegetables, and garden onion. This makes methyl 2-propenyl disulfide a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0059848::m-Ethyl_toluene belongs to the class of organic compounds known as toluenes. Toluenes are compounds containing a benzene ring which bears a methane group. m-Ethyl_toluene is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. m-Ethyl_toluene has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, m-ethyl_toluene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP).|
HMDB0000863::Isopropyl alcohol or 2-propanol is an isomer of 1-propanol. It is a colorless liquid having disinfectant properties. It is used in the manufacture of acetone and its derivatives and as a solvent. Topically, it is used as an antiseptic. Small amounts of this alcohol are produced naturally by gut microbial flora.|
HMDB0001875::It is the simplest alcohol, and is a light, volatile, colourless, flammable, poisonous liquid with a distinctive odor that is somewhat milder and sweeter than ethanol (Wikipedia). Methanol is responsible for accidental, suicidal, and epidemic poisonings, resulting in death or permanent sequelae. Toxicity is due to the metabolic products of alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) and aldehyde dehydrogenase. (PMID 15627163  ). The rapid and accurate diagnosis of toxic alcohol poisoning due to methanol (methyl alcohol) is paramount in preventing serious adverse outcomes. The quantitative measurement of specific serum levels of methanol using gas chromatography is expensive, time consuming and generally only available at major tertiary-care facilities. (PMID 15862085  ).|
HMDB0011469::2-Butanol, or sec-butanol, is a chemical compound with formula C4H10O. This secondary alcohol is a flammable, colorless liquid that is soluble in 12 parts water and completely miscible with polar organic solvent such as ethers and other alcohols.|
HMDB0013811::1-Nitroheptane belongs to the class of organic compounds known as organic nitro compounds. Organic nitro compounds are compounds having the nitro group, -NO2 (free valence on nitrogen), which may be attached to carbon, nitrogen (as in nitramines), or oxygen (as in nitrates), among other elements (in the absence of specification, C-nitro compounds are usually implied). 1-Nitroheptane is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. 1-Nitroheptane has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. |
HMDB0029595::Nonane is found in common oregano. Nonane is present in numerous plant oils including olive oils.Nonane is a linear alkane hydrocarbon with the chemical formula C9H20. Nonane has 35 structural isomers. (Wikipedia|
HMDB0029603::Pentane is found in alcoholic beverages. Pentane is present in hop oil.Pentane is any or one of the organic compounds with the formula C5H12. This alkane is a component of some fuels and is employed as a specialty solvent in the laboratory. Its properties are very similar to those of butane and hexane. It exists in three structural isomers, the branched isomers are called isopentane and neopentane. Pentane is one of the primary blowing agents used in the production of polystyrene foam|
HMDB0029762::Methyl (S)-2-methylbutanoate, also known as fema 2719, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty acid esters. These are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. Methyl (S)-2-methylbutanoate is soluble (in water) and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). Methyl (S)-2-methylbutanoate has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, methyl (S)-2-methylbutanoate is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Outside of the human body, methyl (S)-2-methylbutanoate can be found in fruits and pomes. This makes methyl (S)-2-methylbutanoate a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0030062::Methyl propionate is a flavouring ingredient. It belongs to the family of carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbo atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or oaryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group).|
HMDB0031294::2-Octanone is found in alcoholic beverages. 2-Octanone is a trace constituent of plant oils. Also present in apple, apricot, banana, papaya, wheat bread, other breads, cheddar cheese, Swiss cheese, coffee, black tea, roasted filbert, plum brandy and cooked shrimp. 2-Octanone is a flavouring ingredien|
HMDB0031343::Methyl cyclohexanecarboxylate, also known as fema 3568 or hexahydrobenzoic acid methyl ester, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as methyl esters. These are organic compounds containing a carboxyl group that is esterified with a methyl group. They have the general structure RC(=O)OR', where R=H or organyl group and R'=methyl group. Methyl cyclohexanecarboxylate is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). Methyl cyclohexanecarboxylate has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, methyl cyclohexanecarboxylate is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Methyl cyclohexanecarboxylate has a berry, estery, and fruity taste.|
HMDB0031450::, also known as dekan or N-decane, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as alkanes. These are acyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbons having the general formula CnH2n+2 , and therefore consisting entirely of hydrogen atoms and saturated carbon atoms. Thus, is considered to be a hydrocarbon lipid molecule. exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, sebacic acid, decanoic acid, and 2,3,5,8-tetramethyldecane. is an alkane tasting compound that can be found in common oregano, safflower, and sweet bay. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0031528::Isopentyl acetate is found in apple. Isopentyl acetate is present in many fruit aromas, especially banana. Isopentyl acetate is used in banana flavouring. Isoamyl acetate has a strong odor (similar to Juicy Fruit or a pear drop) which is also described as similar to both banana and pear. Banana oil is a term that is applied either to pure isoamyl acetate or to flavorings that are mixtures of isoamyl acetate, amyl acetate, nitrocellulose and other flavors. Pear oil commonly refers to a solution of isoamyl acetate in ethanol that is used as an artificial flavor. Isoamyl acetate, also known as isopentyl acetate, is an organic compound that is the ester formed from isoamyl alcohol and acetic acid. It is a clear colorless liquid that is only slightly soluble in water, but very soluble in most organic solvents|
HMDB0031549::, also known as miak or isobutylacetone, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as ketones. These are organic compounds in which a carbonyl group is bonded to two carbon atoms R2C=O (neither R may be a hydrogen atom). Ketones that have one or more alpha-hydrogen atoms undergo keto-enol tautomerization, the tautomer being an enol. Thus, is considered to be an oxygenated hydrocarbon lipid molecule. exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and an extremely weak acidic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as saliva, feces, and urine. Within the cell, is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Outside of the human body, can be found in eggs, fruits, and tea. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0031598::2,3-Pentanedione is found in cereals and cereal products. 2,3-Pentanedione is a flavour ingredient. 2,3-Pentanedione is present in peach, wheat bread, yoghurt, cocoa, coffee, black tea, roasted barley, roasted filbert and other foodstuff|
HMDB0035238::Methyl hexanoate is found in alcoholic beverages. Methyl hexanoate is present in wine grapes, melon, raspberry, blackberry, plum, quince, apple brandy, wines, Bourbon vanilla, coffee, black tea, potato, tomato, cheeses, rye bread, meats and other foodstuffs. Methyl hexanoate is a flavouring agent|
HMDB0035765::p-Menthan-3-ol is found in herbs and spices. p-Menthan-3-ol is found in many essential oils.Menthol is an organic compound made synthetically or obtained from peppermint or other mint oils. Natural menthol exists as one pure stereoisomer, nearly always the (1R,2S,5R) form ((-)-menthol). There are 8 possible stereoisomers. (Wikipedia|
HMDB0036209::Propyl 2-methylpropanoate, also known as fema 2936 or isobutyric acid, propyl ester, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbon atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or an aryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group). Propyl 2-methylpropanoate is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). Propyl 2-methylpropanoate has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, propyl 2-methylpropanoate is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Propyl 2-methylpropanoate has a sweet, berry, and fruity taste.|
HMDB0036994::Terpinolene is found in allspice. Terpinolene is a constituent of many essential oils e.g. Citrus, Mentha, Juniperus, Myristica species Parsnip oil (Pastinaca sativa) is a major source (40-70%). Terpinolene is a flavouring ingredient|
HMDB0039095::, also known as amyl acetate or 1-pentyl acetate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbon atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or an aryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group). Thus, is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, is primarily located in the cytoplasm. exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. can be biosynthesized from pentan-1-ol. is a banana, ethereal, and fruity tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as papaya, cocoa bean, sweet bay, and peach. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0059905::Ethylbenzene, also known as ethylbenzol or phenylethane, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as benzene and substituted derivatives. These are aromatic compounds containing one monocyclic ring system consisting of benzene. Ethylbenzene exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Ethylbenzene has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and blood. Within the cell, ethylbenzene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). Ethylbenzene exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Outside of the human body, ethylbenzene can be found in black walnut and safflower. This makes ethylbenzene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. Ethylbenzene is formally rated as a possible carcinogen (by IARC 2B) and is also a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0000477::7Z,10Z-Hexadecadienoic acid is a conjugated dienoic fatty acid metabolite of conjugated linoleic acid (CLA). CLAs are a naturally occurring group of positional and geometric isomers of linoleic acid, with potential beneficial effects on atherosclerosis, carcinogenesis or obesity in human. Although the molecular mechanisms are largely unknown, it has been proposed that the anti-atherogenic actions comprise reduction of membrane-bound arachidonic acid and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-γ-dependent inhibition of Nuclear Factor kappa B (NF-κB) activation and subsequently reduced prostanoid release. (PMID 16275160  ).|
HMDB0000982::5-Methylcytidine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as pyrimidine nucleosides. Pyrimidine nucleosides are compounds comprising a pyrimidine base attached to a ribosyl or deoxyribosyl moiety. 5-Methylcytidine exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 5-Methylcytidine has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, urine, and blood. Within the cell, 5-methylcytidine is primarily located in the cytoplasm.|
HMDB0010340::Retinyl beta-glucuronide is a natural human metabolite of retinoic acid generated in the liver by UDP glucuonyltransferase. Glucuronidation is used to assist in the excretion of toxic substances, drugs or other substances that cannot be used as an energy source. Glucuronic acid is attached via a glycosidic bond to the substance, and the resulting glucuronide, which has a much higher water solubility than the original substance, is eventually excreted by the kidneys.|
HMDB0011144::LysoPA(18:0e/0:0) is a lysophosphatidic acid. It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphate moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. Lysophosphatidic acids can have different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 (sn-1) or C-2 (sn-2) position. Fatty acids containing 16 and 18 carbons are the most common.LysoPA(18:0e/0:0), in particular, consists of one octadecyl chain.  Lysophosphatidic acid is the simplest possible glycerophospholipid. It is the biosynthetic precursor of phosphatidic acid. Although it is present at very low levels only in animal tissues, it is extremely important biologically, influencing many biochemical processes.|
HMDB0011154::1-(1Z-hexadecenyl)-sn-glycero-3-phosphate is an intermediate of ether lipid metabolism. Ether lipids are lipids in which one or more of the carbon atoms on glycerol is bonded to an alkyl chain via an ether linkage, as opposed to the usual ester linkage. 1-(1Z-hexadecenyl)-sn-glycero-3-phosphate is irreversibly produced from 1-(1Z-hexadecenyl)-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine via the enzyme alkylglycerophosphoethanolamine phosphodiesterase (EC: 3.1.4.39). Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011738::N2-gamma-Glutamylglutamine is a dipeptide obtained from condensation of the gamma-carboxy group of glutamic acid with the  α-amino group of glutamine. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis.|
HMDB0028732::Asparaginyl-Hydroxyproline is a dipeptide composed of asparagine and hydroxyproline. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028805::Glutaminylproline is a dipeptide composed of glutamine and proline. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis.|
HMDB0000058::Cyclic AMP is an adenine nucleotide containing one phosphate group which is esterified to both the 3'- and 5'-positions of the sugar moiety. It is a second messenger and a key intracellular regulator, functioning as a mediator of activity for a number of hormones, including epinephrine, glucagon, and ACTH. cAMP is synthesized from ATP by adenylate cyclase. Adenylate cyclase is located at the cell membranes. Adenylate cyclase is activated by the hormones glucagon and adrenaline and by G protein. Liver adenylate cyclase responds more strongly to glucagon, and muscle adenylate cyclase responds more strongly to adrenaline. cAMP decomposition into AMP is catalyzed by the enzyme phosphodiesterase.|
HMDB0000175::Inosinic acid is a purine nucleotide which has hypoxanthine as the base and one phosphate group esterified to the sugar moiety. Inosinic acid is a nucleotide present in muscle and other tissues. It is formed by the deamination of AMP and when hydrolysed produces inosine. Inosinic acid is the ribonucleotide of hypoxanthine and is the first compound formed during the synthesis of purine. (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0000684::Kynurenine is a metabolite of the amino acid tryptophan used in the production of niacin. L-Kynurenine is a central compound of the tryptophan metabolism pathway since it can change into the neuroprotective agent kynurenic acid or to the neurotoxic agent quinolinic acid. The break-up of these endogenous compounds' balance can be observable in many disorders such as stroke, epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. It can also occur in neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's disease, Huntington's, and Alzheimer's disease; and in mental disorders such as schizophrenia and depression.|
HMDB0001049::gamma-Glutamylcysteine is a dipeptide composed of gamma-glutamate and cysteine, and is a proteolytic breakdown product of larger proteins. It belongs to the family of N-acyl-alpha amino acids and derivatives. These are compounds containing an alpha amino acid which bears an acyl group at its terminal nitrogen atom. gamma-Glutamylcysteine is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. gamma-Glutamylcysteine is a product of enzyme glutamate-cysteine ligase [EC 6.3.2.2] and a substrate of enzyme glutathione synthase [EC 6.3.2.3] in the glutamate metabolism pathway (KEGG).|
HMDB0001051::Glyceraldehyde is a triose monosaccharide with chemical formula C3H6O3. It is the simplest of all common aldoses. It is a sweet, colourless crystalline solid that is an intermediate compound in carbohydrate metabolism. The word "glyceraldehyde" comes from combining glycerine and aldehyde, as glyceraldehyde is merely glycerine with one hydroxide changed to an aldehyde. Glyceraldehyde is produced from the action of the enzyme glyceraldehyde dehydrogenase, which converts glycerol to glyceraldehyde using NADP as a cofactor. When present at sufficiently high levels, glyceraldehyde can be a cytotoxin and a mutagen. A cytotoxin is a compound that kills cells. A mutagen is a compound that causes mutations in DNA. Glyceraldehyde is a highly reactive compound that can modify and cross-link proteins. Glyceraldehyde-modified proteins appear to be cytotoxic, depress intracellular glutathione levels, and induce reactive oxygen species (ROS) production (PMID: 14981296  ). Glyceraldehyde has been shown to cause chromosome damage to human cells in culture and is mutagenic in the Ames bacterial test.|
HMDB0001906::Aminoisobutyric acid is a nonprotein amino acid (is an end product of pyrimidine metabolism) excreted in the urine of about 5% of healthy individuals (PMID 14806475  ), and high excretion is an autosomal recessive phenotype (PMID 13058271  ).|
HMDB0002303::Dimethylsulfide is the predominant volatile sulfur compound (VSC) in breadth malodor, a metabolite of suplatast tosilate (a dimethylsulphonium compound for the treatment of asthma) in patients that regularly take that medication. (PMID 14628896  ). Dimethylsulfide is a sulfur containing organic chemical compound with a disagreeable odor. In vapor form it is produced by cooking of certain vegetables, notably corn and cabbage, and seafood. It is also an indication of bacterial infection in malt production and brewing. It is a breakdown product of dimethylsulfoniopropionate, and is also produced by the bacterial metabolism of methanethiol. Dimethyl sulfide in concentrated liquid form is insoluble and a flammable.-- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0031243::Isobutyraldehyde, also known as 2-methylpropanal or isobutanal, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as short-chain aldehydes. These are an aldehyde with a chain length containing between 2 and 5 carbon atoms. Isobutyraldehyde exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and an extremely weak acidic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). Isobutyraldehyde has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, isobutyraldehyde is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Isobutyraldehyde exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Isobutyraldehyde is an aldehydic, floral, and fresh tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as fennel, pigeon pea, tea leaf willow, and sunburst squash (pattypan squash). This makes isobutyraldehyde a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0059899::Alpha-Methylstyrene, also known as 2-phenylpropene or α-methylstyrene, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenylpropenes. Phenylpropenes are compounds containing a phenylpropene moiety, which consists of a propene substituent bound to a phenyl group. Alpha-Methylstyrene exists as a liquid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Alpha-Methylstyrene has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, Alpha-methylstyrene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). Alpha-Methylstyrene exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans.|
HMDB0094666::Nonyl cyclopropane belongs to the class of organic compounds known as cycloalkanes. These are saturated monocyclic hydrocarbons (with or without side chains). Nonyl cyclopropane is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Nonyl cyclopropane has been primarily detected in feces. |
HMDB0029147::N-gamma-Glutamylglutamine is a dipeptide obtained from condensation of the gamma-carboxy group of glutamic acid with the side-chain amide group of glutamine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis.|
HMDB0007175::DG(18:0/22:2(13Z,16Z)/0:0) is a diglyceride, or a diacylglycerol (DAG). It is a glyceride consisting of two fatty acid chains covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through ester linkages. Diacylglycerols can have many different combinations of fatty acids attached at both the C-1 and C-2 positions. DG(18:0/22:2(13Z,16Z)/0:0), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Mono- and diacylglycerols are common food additives used to blend together certain ingredients, such as oil and water, which would not otherwise blend well. Dacylglycerols are often found in bakery products, beverages, ice cream, chewing gum, shortening, whipped toppings, margarine, and confections. Synthesis of diacylglycerol begins with glycerol-3-phosphate, which is derived primarily from dihydroxyacetone phosphate, a product of glycolysis (usually in the cytoplasm of liver or adipose tissue cells). Glycerol-3-phosphate is first acylated with acyl-coenzyme A (acyl-CoA) to form lysophosphatidic acid, which is then acylated with another molecule of acyl-CoA to yield phosphatidic acid. Phosphatidic acid is then de-phosphorylated to form diacylglycerol.Diacylglycerols are precursors to triacylglycerols (triglyceride), which are formed by the addition of a third fatty acid to the diacylglycerol under the catalysis of diglyceride acyltransferase. Since diacylglycerols are synthesized via phosphatidic acid, they will usually contain a saturated fatty acid at the C-1 position on the glycerol moiety and an unsaturated fatty acid at the C-2 position.|
HMDB0007103::DG(16:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)/0:0) is a diglyceride, or a diacylglycerol (DAG). It is a glyceride consisting of two fatty acid chains covalently bonded to a glycerol molecule through ester linkages. Diacylglycerols can have many different combinations of fatty acids attached at both the C-1 and C-2 positions. DG(16:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)/0:0), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Mono- and diacylglycerols are common food additives used to blend together certain ingredients, such as oil and water, which would not otherwise blend well. Dacylglycerols are often found in bakery products, beverages, ice cream, chewing gum, shortening, whipped toppings, margarine, and confections. Synthesis of diacylglycerol begins with glycerol-3-phosphate, which is derived primarily from dihydroxyacetone phosphate, a product of glycolysis (usually in the cytoplasm of liver or adipose tissue cells). Glycerol-3-phosphate is first acylated with acyl-coenzyme A (acyl-CoA) to form lysophosphatidic acid, which is then acylated with another molecule of acyl-CoA to yield phosphatidic acid. Phosphatidic acid is then de-phosphorylated to form diacylglycerol.Diacylglycerols are precursors to triacylglycerols (triglyceride), which are formed by the addition of a third fatty acid to the diacylglycerol under the catalysis of diglyceride acyltransferase. Since diacylglycerols are synthesized via phosphatidic acid, they will usually contain a saturated fatty acid at the C-1 position on the glycerol moiety and an unsaturated fatty acid at the C-2 position.|
HMDB0008591::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0029167::2-Methyladipic acid, also known as 2-methyladipate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as medium-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 4 and 12 carbon atoms. 2-Methyladipic acid is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 2-Methyladipic acid has been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, 2-methyladipic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and adiposome.|
HMDB0002381::N-Acetylcystathionine is an amino-acid. It is found in the urine of patients with cystathioninuria which is an autosomal recessive phenotype with abnormal accumulcation of plasma cystathionine, leading to increased urinary excretion (PMID: 1793738  ).|
HMDB0032538::Triethanolamine, also known as trolamine or H3TEA, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as 1,2-aminoalcohols. These are organic compounds containing an alkyl chain with an amine group bound to the C1 atom and an alcohol group bound to the C2 atom. Triethanolamine exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and an extremely weak acidic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). Triethanolamine has been primarily detected in sweat. Within the cell, triethanolamine is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Triethanolamine can be biosynthesized from triethylamine. Triethanolamine is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0028850::Glycyl-Serine is a dipeptide composed of glycine and serine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0028843::Glycyl-Histidine is a dipeptide composed of glycine and histidine. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0029018::Prolyl-Hydroxyproline is a dipeptide composed of proline and hydroxyproline. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0013248::Monoethylhexyl phthalic acid (MEHP) is an active metabolite of Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP). DEHP measured from the blood of pregnant women have been significantly associated with the decreased penis width, shorter anogenital distance, and the incomplete descent of testes of their newborn sons, replicating effects identified in animals(Wikipedia). DEHP hydrolyzes to MEHP via the enzyme Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate acylhydrolase(3.1.1.60)and subsequently to phthalate salts. The released alcohol is susceptible to oxidation to the aldehyde and carboxylic acid.|
HMDB0015217::Pilocarpine is only found in individuals that have used or taken this drug. It is a slowly hydrolyzed muscarinic agonist with no nicotinic effects. Pilocarpine is used as a miotic and in the treatment of glaucoma. [PubChem]Pilocarpine is a cholinergic parasympathomimetic agent. It increase secretion by the exocrine glands, and produces contraction of the iris sphincter muscle and ciliary muscle (when given topically to the eyes) by mainly stimulating muscarinic receptors.|
HMDB0032574::Propylparaben, also known as propyl chemosept or propyl parasept, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as p-hydroxybenzoic acid alkyl esters. These are aromatic compounds containing a benzoic acid, which is esterified with an alkyl group and para-substituted with a hydroxyl group. Propylparaben exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Propylparaben has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and sweat. Within the cell, propylparaben is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). Propylparaben can be biosynthesized from propan-1-ol and 4-hydroxybenzoic acid. Propylparaben has a sweet, burnt, and hawthorn taste. Propylparaben is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0000709::L-Cysteinylglycine disulfide is one of the hydrolysis products of glutathione. Cystinylglycine disulfide is a small peptide replaced cystinylglycine in plasma from patients with homosyctinuria. (PMID: 7333014  ).|
HMDB0000606::In humans, D-2-hydroxyglutaric acid is formed by a hydroxyacid-oxoacid transhydrogenase whereas in bacteria it is formed by a 2-hydroxyglutarate synthase. D-2-Hydroxyglutaric acid is also formed via the normal activity of hydroxyacid-oxoacid transhydrogenase during conversion of 4-hydroxybutyrate to succinate semialdehyde. The compound can be converted to alpha-ketoglutaric acid through the action of a 2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.99.2).| In humans, there are two such enzymes (D2HGDH and L2HGDH). Both the D and the L stereoisomers of hydroxyglutaric acid are found in body fluids. D-2-Hydroxyglutaric acid is a biochemical hallmark of the inherited neurometabolic disorder D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (OMIM: 600721  ) and the genetic disorder glutaric aciduria II. D-2-Hydroxyglutaric aciduria (caused by loss of D2HGDH or gain of function of IDH) is rare, with symptoms including cancer, macrocephaly, cardiomyopathy, mental retardation, hypotonia, and cortical blindness. An elevated urine level of D-2-hydroxyglutaric acid has been reported in patients with spondyloenchondrodysplasia (OMIM: 271550  ). D-2-Hydroxyglutaric acid can be converted to alpha-ketoglutaric acid through the action of 2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase (D2HGDH). Additionally, the enzyme D-3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH) can catalyze the NADH-dependent reduction of alpha-ketoglutarate (AKG) to D-2-hydroxyglutarate (D-2HG). Nyhan et al. (1995) described 3 female patients, 2 of them sibs, who were found to have excess accumulation of D-2-hydroxyglutaric acid in the urine. The phenotype was quite variable, even among the sibs, but included mental retardation, macrocephaly with cerebral atrophy, hypotonia, seizures, and involuntary movements. One of the patients developed severe intermittent vomiting and was given a pyloromyotomy. The electroencephalogram demonstrated hypsarrhythmia. There was an increased concentration of protein in cerebrospinal fluid, an unusual finding in inborn errors of metabolism.| D-2-Hydroxyglutaric acid can also be produced via gain-of-function mutations in the cytosolic and mitochondrial isoforms of isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH). IDH is part of the TCA cycle and this compound is generated in high abundance when IDH is mutated. Since D-2-hydroxyglutaric acid is sufficiently similar in structure to 2-oxoglutarate (2OG), it is able to inhibit a range of 2OG-dependent dioxygenases, including histone lysine demethylases (KDMs) and members of the ten-eleven translocation (TET) family of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) hydroxylases. This inhibitory effect leads to alterations in the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-mediated hypoxic response and alterations in gene expression through global epigenetic remodeling. The net effect is that D-2-hydroxyglutaric acid causes a cascading effect that leads genetic perturbations and malignant transformation.| Depending on the circumstances, D-2-hydroxyglutaric acid can act as an oncometabolite, a neurotoxin, an acidogen, and a metabotoxin. An oncometabolite is a compound that promotes tumour growth and survival. A neurotoxin is compound that is toxic to neurons or nerual tissue. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels.  As an oncometabolite, D-2-hydroxyglutaric acid is a competitive inhibitor of multiple alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases, including histone demethylases and the TET family of 5mC hydroxylases. As a result, high levels of 2-hydroxyglutarate lead to genome-wide histone and DNA methylation alterations, which in turn lead to mutations that ultimately cause cancer (PMID: 29038145  ). As a neurotoxin, D-2-hydroxyglutaric acid mediates its neurotoxicity through activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors. D-2-Hydroxyglutaric acid is structurally similar to the excitatory amino acid glutamate and stimulates neurodegeneration by mechanisms similar to glutamate, NMDA, or mitochondrial toxins (PMID: 12153528  ).| As an acidogen, D-2-hydroxyglutaric acid is classified as an alpha hydroxy acid belonging to the general class of compounds known as organic acids. Chronically high levels of D-2-hydroxyglutaric acid are a feature of the inborn error of metabolism called D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart abnormalities, kidney abnormalities, liver damage, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of untreated D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures.|
HMDB0000694::L-2-Hydroxyglutaric acid is a metabolite that accumulates in L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria, which is a neurometabolic disorder (OMIM: 236792  ), and has been reported in multiple patients who have a clinical phenotype of progressive neurodegeneration with extrapyramidal and cerebellar signs, seizures, and spongiform changes in the white matter (OMIM: 600721  ). In humans, 2-hydroxyglutarate is formed by a hydroxyacid-oxoacid transhydrogenase whereas in bacteria it is formed by a 2-hydroxyglutarate synthase. L-2-Hydroxyglutaric acid can be converted to alpha-ketoglutaric acid through the action of 2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.99.2). In humans, there are two such enzymes (D2HGDH and L2HGDH). Both the D and L stereoisomers of hydroxyglutaric acid are found in body fluids. L-2-Hydroxyglutaric acid can also be produced via gain-of-function mutations in the cytosolic and mitochondrial isoforms of isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH). IDH is part of the TCA cycle and this compound is generated in high abundance when IDH is mutated. Since L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid is sufficiently similar in structure to 2-oxoglutarate (2OG), it is able to inhibit a range of 2OG-dependent dioxygenases, including histone lysine demethylases (KDMs) and members of the ten-eleven translocation (TET) family of 5-methylcytosine (5mC) hydroxylases. This inhibitory effect leads to alterations in the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-mediated hypoxic response and alterations in gene expression through global epigenetic remodeling. The net effect is that L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid causes a cascading effect that leads genetic perturbations and malignant transformation.| Depending on the circumstances, L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid can function as an oncometabolite, a neurotoxin, an acidogen, and a metabotoxin. An oncometabolite is a compound that promotes tumour growth and survival. A neurotoxin is compound that is toxic to neurons or neural tissue. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels.  As an oncometabolite, L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid is a competitive inhibitor of multiple alpha-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases, including histone demethylases and the TET family of 5mC hydroxylases. As a result, high levels of 2-hydroxyglutarate lead to genome-wide histone and DNA methylation alterations, which in turn lead to mutations that ultimately cause cancer (PMID: 29038145  ). As a neurotoxin, L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid mediates its neurotoxicity through activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors. L-2-Hydroxyglutaric acid is structurally similar to the excitatory amino acid glutamate and stimulates neurodegeneration by mechanisms similar to glutamate, NMDA, or mitochondrial toxins (PMID: 12153528  ).| As an acidogen, L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid is classified as an alpha hydroxy acid belonging to the general class of compounds known as organic acids. Chronically high levels of L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid are characteristic of the inborn error of metabolism called L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart abnormalities, kidney abnormalities, liver damage, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are the symptoms typical of untreated L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures.|
HMDB0000601::Coprocholic acid, also called 3α,7α,12α-Trihydroxy-5β-cholestan-26-oic acid, is a bile acid. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in the bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depending only on the presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine, and the portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH, and consequently require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g. membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ).|
HMDB0012454::3beta,7alpha-Dihydroxy-5-cholestenoate is found in the primary bile acid biosynthesis pathway. It is created from 3beta-Hydroxy-5-cholestenoate through the action of CYP7B (E1.14.13.100). 3beta,7alpha-Dihydroxy-5-cholestenoate is then converted into 7alpha-Hydroxy-3-oxo-4-cholestenoate by the action of HSD3B7 (EC:1.1.1.181).|
HMDB0001311::Lactic acid is an organic acid. It is a chiral molecule, consisting of two optical isomers, L-lactic acid and D-lactic acid, with the L-isomer being the most common in living organisms. Lactic acid plays a role in several biochemical processes and is produced in the muscles during intense activity. D-Lactic acid is the end product of the enzyme glyoxalase II (or hydroxyacyl-glutathione hydrolase) (EC 3.1.2.6), which converts the intermediate substrate S-lactoyl-glutathione to reduced glutathione and D-lactate (OMIM: 138790  ).|
HMDB0002719::Desmosterol is an intermediate in the synthesis of cholesterol. Desmosterolosis is a rare autosomal recessive inborn errors of cholesterol synthesis that is caused by defective activity of desmosterol reductase which results in an accumulation of demosterol (DHCR24, EC 1.3.1.72), combines a severe osteosclerotic skeletal dysplasia and includes 2-3 toe syndactyly with Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS; the biochemical block in SLOS results in decreased cholesterol levels and increased 7-dehydrocholesterol levels). Desmosterolosis is caused by mutation of the 24-dehydrocholesterol reductase gene (DHCR24). Many of the malformations in SLOS and desmosterolosis are consistent with impaired hedgehog function. The hedgehog proteins include Sonic hedgehog (SHH), which plays a major role in midline patterning and limb development. Desmosterolosis, caused by defective activity of desmosterol reductase, combines a severe osteosclerotic skeletal dysplasia. 7-dehydrocholesterol reductase (DHCR7, EC 1.3.1.21) reduces the C7-C8 double bond in the sterol B ring to form cholesterol or desmosterol depending upon the precursor. Desmosterol can be converted to cholesterol by DHCR24. Therefore, SLOS and Desmosterolosis patients invariably have elevated levels of cholesterol precursor's 7-dehydrocholesterol (and its spontaneous isomer 8-dehydrocholesterol) and absent desmosterol. (PMID: 14631207  , 16207203  ).|
HMDB0000561::B-Carotene is a carotenoid that is a precursor of vitamin A. It is administered to reduce the severity of photosensitivity reactions in patients with erythropoietic protoporphyria (porphyria, erythropoietic). (From Reynolds JEF(Ed): Martindale: The Extra Pharmacopoeia (electronic version). Micromedex, Inc, Engewood, CO, 1995.) -- Pubchem; Carotene is an orange photosynthetic pigment important for photosynthesis. It is responsible for the orange colour of the carrot and many other fruits and vegetables. It contributes to photosynthesis by transmitting the light energy it absorbs to chlorophyll. Chemically, carotene is a terpene. It is the dimer of retinol (vitamin A) and comes in two primary forms: alpha- and beta-carotene. gamma-, delta- and epsilon-carotene also exist. Carotene can be stored in the liver and converted to vitamin A as needed. Beta-carotene is an anti-oxidant and such can be useful for curbing the excess of damaging free radicals in the body. However, the usefulness of beta-carotene as a dietary supplement (i.e. taken as a pill) is still subject to debate. Beta-carotene is fat-soluble, so a small amount of fat is needed to absorb it into the body. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0002789::Zeaxanthin is a carotenoid xanthophyll and is one of the most common carotenoid found in nature. It is the pigment that gives corn, saffron, and many other plants their characteristic color. Zeaxanthin breaks down to form picrocrocin and safranal, which are responsible for the taste and aroma of saffron Carotenoids are among the most common pigments in nature and are natural lipid soluble antioxidants. Zeaxanthin is one of the two carotenoids (the other is lutein) that accumulate in the eye lens and macular region of the retina with concentrations in the macula greater than those found in plasma and other tissues. Lutein and zeaxanthin have identical chemical formulas and are isomers, but they are not stereoisomers. The main difference between them is in the location of a double bond in one of the end rings. This difference gives lutein three chiral centers whereas zeaxanthin has two. A relationship between macular pigment optical density, a marker of lutein and zeaxanthin concentration in the macula, and lens optical density, an antecedent of cataractous changes, has been suggested. The xanthophylls may act to protect the eye from ultraviolet phototoxicity via quenching reactive oxygen species and/or other mechanisms. Some observational studies have shown that generous intakes of lutein and zeaxanthin, particularly from certain xanthophyll-rich foods like spinach, broccoli and eggs, are associated with a significant reduction in the risk for cataract (up to 20%) and for age-related macular degeneration (up to 40%). While the pathophysiology of cataract and age-related macular degeneration is complex and contains both environmental and genetic components, research studies suggest dietary factors including antioxidant vitamins and xanthophylls may contribute to a reduction in the risk of these degenerative eye diseases. Further research is necessary to confirm these observations. (PMID: 11023002  ).|
HMDB0003000::Lycopene (molecular formula: C40H56) is a bright red carotenoid pigment, a phytochemical found in tomatoes and other red fruits. Lycopene is the most common carotenoid in the human body and is one of the most potent carotenoid antioxidants. Its name is derived from the tomato's species classification, Solanum lycopersicum. -- Wikipedia; Lycopene is a terpene assembled from 8 isoprene units. -- Wikipedia; Lycopene is the most powerful carotenoid quencher of singlet oxygen. Singlet oxygen from ultraviolet light is a primary cause of skin aging. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0003233::Lutein is a common carotenoid xanthophyll found in nature. Carotenoids are among the most common pigments in nature and are natural lipid soluble antioxidants. Lutein is one of the two carotenoids (the other is zeaxanthin) that accumulate in the eye lens and macular region of the retina with concentrations in the macula greater than those found in plasma and other tissues. Lutein and zeaxanthin have identical chemical formulas and are isomers, but they are not stereoisomers. The main difference between them is in the location of a double bond in one of the end rings. This difference gives lutein three chiral centers whereas zeaxanthin has two. A relationship between macular pigment optical density, a marker of lutein and zeaxanthin concentration in the macula, and lens optical density, an antecedent of cataractous changes, has been suggested. The xanthophylls may act to protect the eye from ultraviolet phototoxicity via quenching reactive oxygen species and/or other mechanisms. Some observational studies have shown that generous intakes of lutein and zeaxanthin, particularly from certain xanthophyll-rich foods like spinach, broccoli and eggs, are associated with a significant reduction in the risk for cataract (up to 20%) and for age-related macular degeneration (up to 40%). While the pathophysiology of cataract and age-related macular degeneration is complex and contains both environmental and genetic components, research studies suggest dietary factors including antioxidant vitamins and xanthophylls may contribute to a reduction in the risk of these degenerative eye diseases. Further research is necessary to confirm these observations. (PMID: 11023002  ).|
HMDB0003993::Apha-carotene is one of the primary isomer of carotene. plasma levels of alpha-carotene is positively associated with the detection rate of (theaflatoxin B1)AFB1-DNA adducts in a dose-dependent manner, whereas plasma lycopene level was inversely related to the presence of the adducts in urine.(PMID: 9214602  ).|
HMDB0033844::beta-Cryptoxanthin is found in abalone. beta-Cryptoxanthin is isolated from papaya (Carica papaya) and many other higher plants, also from fish eggs. Cryptoxanthin is a natural carotenoid pigment. It has been isolated from a variety of sources including the petals and flowers of plants in the genus Physalis, orange rind, papaya, egg yolk, butter, apples, and bovine blood serum. In a pure form, cryptoxanthin is a red crystalline solid with a metallic luster. It is freely soluble in chloroform, benzene, pyridine and carbon disulfide.| In the human body, cryptoxanthin is converted to vitamin A (retinol) and is therefore considered a provitamin A. As with other carotenoids, cryptoxanthin is an antioxidant and may help prevent free radical damage to cells and DNA, as well as stimulate the repair of oxidative damage to DNA. Structurally, cryptoxanthin is closely related to beta-carotene, with only the addition of a hydroxyl group. It is a member of the class of carotenoids known as xanthophylls. beta-Cryptoxanthin is a major source of vitamin A, often second only to beta-carotene, and is present in fruits such as oranges, tangerines, and papayas. (PMID: 8554331  ); Frequent intake of tropical fruits that are rich in beta-cryptoxanthin is associated with higher plasma beta-cryptoxanthin concentrations in Costa Rican adolescents. Papaya intake was the best food predictor of plasma beta-cryptoxanthin concentrations. Subjects that frequently (> or =3 times/day) consumed tropical fruits with at least 50 micro g/100 g beta-cryptoxanthin (papaya, tangerine, orange and watermelon) had twofold the plasma beta-cryptoxanthin concentrations of those with intakes of <4 times/week. In sum, the diet-plasma carotenoid and tocopherol correlations were generally low in Costa Rican adolescents. (PMID: 12368412  ); Modest increase in beta-cryptoxanthin intake, equivalent to one glass of freshly squeezed orange juice per day, is associated with a reduced risk of developing inflammatory disorders such as rheumatoid arthritis. (PMID: 16087992  ); Higher prediagnostic serum levels of total carotenoids and beta-cryptoxanthin were associated with lower smoking-related lung cancer risk in middle-aged and older men in Shanghai, China. (PMID: 11440962  );| The study by Yuan et al. (PMID 1144092  , above) reports a 35 to 40% protective effect among smokers due to the intake of carotenoids, beta-cryptoxanthin, and retinol. beta-Cryptoxanthin is a correct interpretation yields an effect size of 54 to 66%, an important difference. detected during the process of reviewing articles published in Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention, it has come to the author's attention that the interpretation of relative risk (RR) and odds ratio (OR) as an estimated measure of hypothetical protective effects is wrong in some of them. (PMID: 15066939  ); Consistent with inhibition of the lung cancer cell growth, beta-cryptoxanthin induced the mRNA levels of retinoic acid receptor beta (RARbeta) in BEAS-2B cells, although this effect was less pronounced in A549 cells. Furthermore, beta-cryptoxanthin transactivated RAR-mediated transcription activity of the retinoic acid response element. These findings suggest a mechanism of anti-proliferative action of beta-cryptoxanthin and indicate that beta-cryptoxanthin may be a promising chemopreventive agent against lung cancer. (PMID: 16841329  |
HMDB0059732::2-(2-Phenylacetoxy)propionylglycine belongs to the family of N-acyl-alpha Amino Acids and Derivatives. These are compounds containing an alpha amino acid which bears an acyl group at his terminal nitrogen atom.|
HMDB0059773::S-3-Oxodecanoyl cysteamine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty acyl thioesters. These are thioester derivatives of a fatty acid with the general formula RC(=O)SR', where R is the fatty acyl chain. S-3-Oxodecanoyl cysteamine is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. S-3-Oxodecanoyl cysteamine has been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, S-3-oxodecanoyl cysteamine is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm.|
HMDB0000599::Chromium is a naturally occurring heavy metal found in the environment commonly in trivalent, Cr(III), and hexavalent, Cr(VI), forms. The reduction of Cr(VI) to Cr(III) results in the formation of reactive intermediates that contribute to the cytotoxicity, genotoxicity and carcinogenicity of Cr(VI)-containing compounds.| The major non-occupational source of chromium for humans is food such as vegetables, meat, urban air, hip or knee prostheses and cigarettes. Cr(VI) is a widely used in industrial chemicals, extensively used in paints, metal finishes, steel including stainless steel manufacturing, alloy cast irons, chrome and wood treatment. On the contrary, Cr(III) salts such as chromium polynicotinate, chromium chloride and chromium picolinate (CrP) are used as micronutrients and nutritional supplements and have been demonstrated to exhibit a significant number of health benefits in animals and humans. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. Chromium enters the body through the lungs, gastro-intestinal tract and to a lesser extent through skin. Inhalation is the most important route for occupational exposure, whereas non-occupational exposure occurs via ingestion of chromium-containing food and water. Regardless of route of exposure Cr(III) is poorly absorbed whereas Cr(VI) is more readily absorbed. Further, absorption of Cr(VI) is poorer by oral route, it is thus not very toxic when introduced by the oral route. But chromium is very toxic by dermal and inhalation routes and causes lung cancer, nasal irritation, nasal ulcer, hypersensitivity reactions and contact dermatitis. All the ingested Cr(VI) is reduced to Cr(III) before entering in the blood stream. The main routes for the excretion of chromium are via kidney/urine and the bile/feces. Cr(III) is unable to enter into the cells but Cr(VI) enters through membrane anionic transporters. Intracellular Cr(VI) is metabolically reduced to Cr(III). Cr(VI) does not react with macromolecules such as DNA, RNA, proteins and lipids. However, both Cr(III) and the reductional intermediate Cr(V) are capable of co-ordinate, covalent interactions with macromolecules.| Chromium is an essential nutrient required by the human body to promote the action of insulin for the utilization of sugars, proteins and fats. CrP has been used as nutritional supplement; it controls blood sugar in diabetes and may reduce cholesterol and blood pressure levels. Chromium increases insulin binding to cells, insulin receptor number and activates insulin receptor kinase leading to increased insulin sensitivity. But high doses of chromium and long term exposure of it can give rise to various, cytotoxic and genotoxic reactions that affect the immune system of the body. However, the mechanism of the Cr(VI)-induced cytotoxicity is not entirely understood. A series of in vitro and in vivo studies have demonstrated that Cr(VI) induces oxidative stress through enhanced production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) leading to genomic DNA damage and oxidative deterioration of lipids and proteins. A cascade of cellular events occur following Cr(VI)-induced oxidative stress including enhanced production of superoxide anion and hydroxyl radicals, increased lipid peroxidation and genomic DNA fragmentation, modulation of intracellular oxidized states, activation of protein kinase C, apoptotic cell death and altered gene expression. Some of the factors in determining the biological outcome of chromium exposure include the bioavailability, solubility of chromium compounds and chemical speciation, intracellular reduction and interaction with DNA. The chromium genotoxicity manifests as several types of DNA lesions, gene mutations and inhibition of macromolecular synthesis. Further, chromium exposure may lead to apoptosis, premature terminal growth arrest or neoplastic transformation. Chromium-induced tumor suppressor gene p53 and oxidative processes are some of the major factors that may determine the cellular outcome. Studies have utilized these approaches to understand the interrelationship between chromium-induced genotoxicity, apoptosis and effects on immune response. (PMID: 12208600  ).|
HMDB0000336::The chiral metabolites 3-hydroxyisobutyric acid (HIBA) and 3-aminoisobutyric acid (AIBA) are intermediates in the pathways of l-valine and thymine and play an important role in the diagnosis of the very rare inherited metabolic diseases 3-hydroxyisobutyric aciduria (OMIM 236795  ) and methylmalonic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency (OMIM 603178  ). (PMID 10686279  ).|
HMDB0001167::Pyruvaldehyde is an organic compound used often as a reagent in organic synthesis, as a flavoring agent, and in tanning. It has been demonstrated as an intermediate in the metabolism of acetone and its derivatives in isolated cell preparations, in various culture media, and in vivo in certain animals.|
HMDB0060524::3-Iodothyronamine is an endogenous thyronamine. T1AM is a high-affinity ligand for the trace amine-associated receptor TAAR1, a recently discovered G protein-coupled receptor. T1AM is the most potent TAAR1 agonist yet discovered. (Wikipedia)|
HMDB0005794::Quercetin is a flavonoid widely distributed in many plants and fruits including red grapes, citrus fruit, tomato, broccoli and other leafy green vegetables, and a number of berries, including raspberries and cranberries. Quercetin itself (aglycone quercetin), as opposed to quercetin glycosides, is not a normal dietary component. Quercitin glycosides are converted to phenolic acids as they pass through the gastrointestinal tract. Quercetin has neither been confirmed scientifically as a specific therapeutic for any condition nor been approved by any regulatory agency. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not approved any health claims for quercetin. Nevertheless, the interest in dietary flavonoids has grown after the publication of several epidemiological studies showing an inverse correlation between dietary consumption of flavonols and flavones and reduced incidence and mortality from cardiovascular disease and cancer. In recent years, a large amount of experimental and some clinical data have accumulated regarding the effects of flavonoids on the endothelium under physiological and pathological conditions. The meta-analysis of seven prospective cohort studies concluded that the individuals in the top third of dietary flavonol intake are associated with a reduced risk of mortality from coronary heart disease as compared with those in the bottom third, after adjustment for known risk factors and other dietary components. A limited number of intervention studies with flavonoids and flavonoid containing foods and extracts has been performed in several pathological conditions. (PMID: 17015250  ).|
HMDB0003152::N-methylnicotinamide is a metabolite of niacin (or nicotinamide) and is commonly found in human urine. However low levels of urinary excretion of N-methylnicotinamide indicates niacin deficiency. (PMID: 16207585  ). In patients with liver cirrhosis nicotinamide methylation is increased leading to a rise in urinary N-methylnicotinamide. The hyperfunction of this methylating pathway might play a protective role against the toxic effect of intracellular accumulation of nicotinamide deriving from the catabolic state of cirrhosis. N-methylnicotinamide is known to inhibit choline transport and reduce choline clearance out of the brain.|
HMDB0029164::(-)-Epicatechin-3'-O-glucuronide belongs to the class of organic compounds known as flavonoid o-glycosides. Flavonoid O-glycosides are compounds containing a carbohydrate moiety which is O-glycosidically linked to the 2-phenylchromen-4-one flavonoid backbone (-)-Epicatechin-3'-O-glucuronide is slightly soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa) (-)-Epicatechin-3'-O-glucuronide has been found in human liver and kidney tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. |
HMDB0029176::3'-O-Methyl-(-)-epicatechin-5-O-sulphate belongs to the class of organic compounds known as 3'-o-methylated flavonoids. These are flavonoids with methoxy groups attached to the C3' atom of the flavonoid backbone. 3'-O-Methyl-(-)-epicatechin-5-O-sulphate is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely strong acidic compound (based on its pKa). 3'-O-Methyl-(-)-epicatechin-5-O-sulphate has been primarily detected in urine. |
HMDB0029177::3'-O-Methyl-(-)-epicatechin-7-O-sulphate belongs to the class of organic compounds known as catechins. Catechins are compounds containing a catechin moiety, which is a 3,4-dihydro-2-chromene-3,5.7-tiol. 3'-O-Methyl-(-)-epicatechin-7-O-sulphate is slightly soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). 3'-O-Methyl-(-)-epicatechin-7-O-sulphate has been primarily detected in urine. |
HMDB0029182::4'-O-Methyl-(-)-epicatechin-5-O-sulphate belongs to the class of organic compounds known as 4'-o-methylated flavonoids. These are flavonoids with methoxy groups attached to the C4' atom of the flavonoid backbone. 4'-O-Methyl-(-)-epicatechin-5-O-sulphate is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely strong acidic compound (based on its pKa). 4'-O-Methyl-(-)-epicatechin-5-O-sulphate has been primarily detected in urine. |
HMDB0029184::4'-O-Methyl-(-)-epicatechin-7-O-sulphate belongs to the class of organic compounds known as 4'-o-methylated flavonoids. These are flavonoids with methoxy groups attached to the C4' atom of the flavonoid backbone. 4'-O-Methyl-(-)-epicatechin-7-O-sulphate is slightly soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). 4'-O-Methyl-(-)-epicatechin-7-O-sulphate has been primarily detected in urine. |
HMDB0029190::5-(3',4'-Dihydroxyphenyl)-gamma-valerolactone-3'-O-glucuronide belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenol ethers. These are aromatic compounds containing an ether group substituted with a benzene ring. 5-(3',4'-Dihydroxyphenyl)-gamma-valerolactone-3'-O-glucuronide is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 5-(3',4'-Dihydroxyphenyl)-gamma-valerolactone-3'-O-glucuronide has been found in human liver and kidney tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. |
HMDB0029226::5'-(3'-Methoxy-4'-hydroxyphenyl)-gamma-valerolactone belongs to the class of organic compounds known as methoxyphenols. Methoxyphenols are compounds containing a methoxy group attached to the benzene ring of a phenol moiety. 5'-(3'-Methoxy-4'-hydroxyphenyl)-gamma-valerolactone is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. 5'-(3'-Methoxy-4'-hydroxyphenyl)-gamma-valerolactone has been primarily detected in urine. |
HMDB0029234::N-[4'-Hydroxy-(e)-cinnamoyl]-L-aspartic acid belongs to the class of organic compounds known as aspartic acid and derivatives. Aspartic acid and derivatives are compounds containing an aspartic acid or a derivative thereof resulting from reaction of aspartic acid at the amino group or the carboxy group, or from the replacement of any hydrogen of glycine by a heteroatom. N-[4'-Hydroxy-(e)-cinnamoyl]-L-aspartic acid is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. N-[4'-Hydroxy-(e)-cinnamoyl]-L-aspartic acid has been primarily detected in urine. |
HMDB0041693::5-(3',5'-Dihydroxyphenyl)-gamma-valerolactone 3-O-glucuronide belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenolic glycosides. These are organic compounds containing a phenolic structure attached to a glycosyl moiety. Some examples of phenolic structures include lignans, and flavonoids. Among the sugar units found in natural glycosides are D-glucose, L-Fructose, and L rhamnose. 5-(3',5'-Dihydroxyphenyl)-gamma-valerolactone 3-O-glucuronide is slightly soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 5-(3',5'-Dihydroxyphenyl)-gamma-valerolactone 3-O-glucuronide has been found in human liver and kidney tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. Within the cell, 5-(3',5'-dihydroxyphenyl)-gamma-valerolactone 3-O-glucuronide is primarily located in the cytoplasm.|
HMDB0041729::(-)-Epicatechin 7-O-glucuronide belongs to the class of organic compounds known as flavonoid-7-o-glucuronides. These are phenolic compounds containing a flavonoid moiety which is O-glycosidically linked to glucuronic acid at the C7-position (-)-Epicatechin 7-O-glucuronide is slightly soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa) (-)-Epicatechin 7-O-glucuronide has been found in human liver and kidney tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. Within the cell, (-)-epicatechin 7-O-glucuronide is primarily located in the cytoplasm.|
HMDB0059710::2-Hydroxynicotinic acid, also known as 2-hydroxypyridine-3-carboxylic acid, is a member of the class of compounds known as pyridinecarboxylic acids. Pyridinecarboxylic acids are compounds containing a pyridine ring bearing a carboxylic acid group. 2-Hydroxynicotinic acid is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 2-Hydroxynicotinic acid can be found in urine. 2-Hydroxynicotinic acid is a white to light yellow powder soluble in water. Its melting point is 258-261°C.|
HMDB0059971::4-Hydroxy-5-(3',4'-dihydroxyphenyl)-valeric acid-O-glucuronide is a conjugate of 4-hydroxy-5-(3',4'-dihydroxyphenyl)-valeric acid-O-glucuronide. A glucuronide, also known as glucuronoside, is any substance produced by linking glucuronic acid to another substance via a glycosidic bond. The glucuronides belong to the glycosides. (Wikipedia)|
HMDB0059973::4-Hydroxy-5-(3',5'-dihydroxyphenyl)-valeric acid-O-glucuronide is a conjugate of 4-hydroxy-5-(3',5'-dihydroxyphenyl)-valeric acid and glucuronide. A glucuronide, also known as glucuronoside, is any substance produced by linking glucuronic acid to another substance via a glycosidic bond. The glucuronides belong to the glycosides. (Wikipedia)|
HMDB0059981::4-Hydroxy-5-(phenyl)-valeric acid-O-sulphate belongs to the class of organic compounds known as benzene and substituted derivatives. These are aromatic compounds containing one monocyclic ring system consisting of benzene. 4-Hydroxy-5-(phenyl)-valeric acid-O-sulphate is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. 4-Hydroxy-5-(phenyl)-valeric acid-O-sulphate has been primarily detected in urine. |
HMDB0059989::5-(3',4'-Dihydroxyphenyl)-gamma-valerolactone-4'-O-glucuronide is a conjugate of 5-(3',4'-dihydroxyphenyl)-gamma-valerolactone-4 and glucuronide. A glucuronide, also known as glucuronoside, is any substance produced by linking glucuronic acid to another substance via a glycosidic bond. The glucuronides belong to the glycosides. (Wikipedia)|
HMDB0060024::Vanillic acid-4-O-glucuronide is a metabolite of Vanillic acid. A glucuronide, also known as glucuronoside, is any substance produced by linking glucuronic acid to another substance via a glycosidic bond. The glucuronides belong to the glycosides. Glucuronidation, the conversion of chemical compounds to glucuronides, is a method that animals use to assist in the excretion of toxic substances, drugs or other substances that cannot be used as an energy source. Glucuronic acid is attached via a glycosidic bond to the substance, and the resulting glucuronide, which has a much higher water solubility than the original substance, is eventually excreted by the kidneys. Enzymes that cleave the glycosidic bond of a glucuronide are called glucuronidases. (Wikipedia)|
HMDB0003429::Cob(I)alamin is the substrate of the enzyme ATP:cob(I)alamin adenosyltransferase (EC 2.5.1.17), that converts reduced cob(I)alamin to the adenosylcobalamin co-factor required for the functional activity of methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (EC 5.4.99.2). Mutations in the human MMAB gene result in a block in adenosylcobalamin synthesis and are responsible for the cblB complementation group of inherited vitamin B12 disorders, such as cobalamin malabsorption, which is an inborn error of metabolism. Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) is a complex cobalt-containing molecule that is essential to human health. It is synthesized in bacteria where it catalyzes numerous methyl transfer and intramolecular rearrangement reactions. In mammals, it is the co-factor of only two enzymes: methionine synthase, which catalyzes the transfer of a methyl group from methyltetrahydrofolate to homocysteine to form methionine, and methylmalonyl-CoA mutase, which catalyzes the rearrangement of methylmalonyl-CoA to form succinyl-CoA. For both enzymes, the vitamin must be modified through intracellular metabolism to co-factor forms: methylcobalamin (MeCbl)1 for methionine synthase and adenosylcobalamin (AdoCbl) for methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (PMID: 16439175  ).|
HMDB0000216::Precursor of epinephrine that is secreted by the adrenal medulla and is a widespread central and autonomic neurotransmitter. Norepinephrine is the principal transmitter of most postganglionic sympathetic fibers and of the diffuse projection system in the brain arising from the locus ceruleus. It is also found in plants and is used pharmacologically as a sympathomimetic. Norepinephrine is elevated in the urine of people who consume bananas.|
HMDB0002786::Nitrite is a nitrite compound is either a salt or an ester of nitrous acid. Sodium nitrite is used for the curing of meat because it prevents bacterial growth and, in a reaction with the meat's myoglobin, gives the product a desirable dark red color. Nitrite can be reduced to nitric oxide or ammonia by many species of bacteria. Under hypoxic conditions, nitrite may release nitric oxide, which causes potent vasodilation. Several mechanisms for nitrite conversion to NO have been described including enzymatic reduction by xanthine oxidoreductase, the mitochondria, and NO synthase (NOS), as well as nonenzymatic acidic disproportionation. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0001403::Prostaglandin D2 (or PGD2) is a prostaglandin that is actively produced in various organs such as the brain, spleen, thymus, bone marrow, uterus, ovary, oviduct, testis, prostate and epididymis, and is involved in many physiological events. PGD2 binds to the prostaglandin D2 receptor (PTGDR) which is a G-protein-coupled receptor. Its activity is mainly mediated by G-S proteins that stimulate adenylate cyclase resulting in an elevation of intracellular cAMP and Ca2+. PGD2 promotes sleep; regulates body temperature, olfactory function, hormone release, and nociception in the central nervous system; prevents platelet aggregation; and induces vasodilation and bronchoconstriction. PGD2 is also released from mast cells as an allergic and inflammatory mediator. Prostaglandin H2 is an unstable intermediate formed from PGG2 by the action of cyclooxygenase (COX) in the arachidonate cascade. In mammalian systems, it is efficiently converted into more stable arachidonate metabolites, such as PGD2, PGE2, PGF2a by the action of three groups of enzymes, PGD synthases (PGDS), PGE synthases and PGF synthases, respectively. PGDS catalyzes the isomerization of PGH2 to PGD2. Two types of PGD2 synthase are known. Lipocalin-type PGD synthase is present in cerebrospinal fluid, seminal plasma and may play an important role in male reproduction. Another PGD synthase, hematopoietic PGD synthase is present in the spleen, fallopian tube, endometrial gland cells, extravillous trophoblasts and villous trophoblasts, and perhaps plays an important role in female reproduction. Recent studies demonstrate that PGD2 is probably involved in multiple aspects of inflammation through its dual receptor systems, DP and CRTH2. (PMID: 12148545  )Prostaglandins are eicosanoids.| The eicosanoids consist of the prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), leukotrienes (LTs) and lipoxins (LXs). The PGs and TXs are collectively identified as prostanoids. Prostaglandins were originally shown to be synthesized in the prostate gland, thromboxanes from platelets (thrombocytes) and leukotrienes from leukocytes, hence the derivation of their names. All mammalian cells except erythrocytes synthesize eicosanoids. These molecules are extremely potent, able to cause profound physiological effects at very dilute concentrations. All eicosanoids function locally at the site of synthesis, through receptor-mediated G-protein linked signaling pathways.|
HMDB0002200::Leukotriene E4 (LTE4) is a cysteinyl leukotriene. Cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLTs) are a family of potent inflammatory mediators that appear to contribute to the pathophysiologic features of allergic rhinitis. Nasal blockage induced by CysLTs is mainly due to dilatation of nasal blood vessels, which can be induced by the nitric oxide produced through CysLT1 receptor activation. LTE4 activates contractile and inflammatory processes via specific interaction with putative seven transmembrane-spanning receptors that couple to G proteins and subsequent intracellular signaling pathways. LTE4 is metabolized from leukotriene C4 in a reaction catalyzed by gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase and a particulate dipeptidase from kidney (PMID: 12607939  , 12432945  , 6311078  ). Leukotrienes are eicosanoids. The eicosanoids consist of the prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), leukotrienes (LTs), and lipoxins (LXs). The PGs and TXs are collectively identified as prostanoids. Prostaglandins were originally shown to be synthesized in the prostate gland, thromboxanes from platelets (thrombocytes), and leukotrienes from leukocytes, hence the derivation of their names. All mammalian cells except erythrocytes synthesize eicosanoids. These molecules are extremely potent and are able to cause profound physiological effects at very dilute concentrations. All eicosanoids function locally at the site of synthesis through receptor-mediated G-protein linked signaling pathways.|
HMDB0002014::Tetradecenoylcarnitine (C14:1) is the most characteristic metabolic marker of very long chain acyl-dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency (PubMed ID 11433098 ); beta-Oxidation of long-chain fatty acids provides the major source of energy in the heart. Defects in enzymes of the beta-oxidation pathway cause sudden, unexplained death in childhood, acute hepatic encephalopathy or liver failure, skeletal myopathy, and cardiomyopathy. ( PubMed ID 7479827 ).|
HMDB0013331:: 3, 5-tetradecadiencarnitine is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. 3, 5-tetradecadiencarnitine can be found in blood and urine. Within a cell, 3, 5-tetradecadiencarnitine is primarily located in the extracellular space and near the membrane.|
HMDB0013128::Valerylcarnitine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as acylcarnitines. These are organic compounds containing a fatty acid with the carboxylic acid attached to carnitine through an ester bond. Valerylcarnitine is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Valerylcarnitine is a fatty ester lipid molecule. Valerylcarnitine can be found in blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and urine. Within a cell, valerylcarnitine is primarily located in the extracellular space and near the membrane. Valerylcarnitine can be found in cow's milk.|
HMDB0010382::LysoPC(16:0) is a lysophospholipid (LyP). It is a monoglycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. Lysophosphatidylcholines can have different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 (sn-1) position. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. LysoPC(16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Lysophosphatidylcholine is found in small amounts in most tissues. It is formed by hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by the enzyme phospholipase A2, as part of the de-acylation/re-acylation cycle that controls its overall molecular species composition. It can also be formed inadvertently during extraction of lipids from tissues if the phospholipase is activated by careless handling. In blood plasma significant amounts of lysophosphatidylcholine are formed by a specific enzyme system, lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), which is secreted from the liver. The enzyme catalyzes the transfer of the fatty acids of position sn-2 of phosphatidylcholine to the free cholesterol in plasma, with formation of cholesterol esters and lysophosphatidylcholine. Lysophospholipids have a role in lipid signaling by acting on lysophospholipid receptors (LPL-R). LPL-R's are members of the G protein-coupled receptor family of integral membrane proteins.|
HMDB0010383::LysoPC(16:1(9Z)/0:0) is a lysophospholipid (LyP). It is a monoglycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. Lysophosphatidylcholines can have different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 (sn-1) position. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. LysoPC(16:1(9Z)/0:0), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Lysophosphatidylcholine is found in small amounts in most tissues. It is formed by hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by the enzyme phospholipase A2, as part of the de-acylation/re-acylation cycle that controls its overall molecular species composition. It can also be formed inadvertently during extraction of lipids from tissues if the phospholipase is activated by careless handling. In blood plasma significant amounts of lysophosphatidylcholine are formed by a specific enzyme system, lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), which is secreted from the liver. The enzyme catalyzes the transfer of the fatty acids of position sn-2 of phosphatidylcholine to the free cholesterol in plasma, with formation of cholesterol esters and lysophosphatidylcholine. Lysophospholipids have a role in lipid signaling by acting on lysophospholipid receptors (LPL-R). LPL-R's are members of the G protein-coupled receptor family of integral membrane proteins.|
HMDB0012108::LysoPC(17:0) is a lysophospholipid (LyP). It is a monoglycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. Lysophosphatidylcholines can have different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 (sn-1) position. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. LysoPC(17:0), in particular, consists of one chain of margaric acid at the C-1 position. The margaric acid moiety is derived from butter, milk and fat of ruminants. Lysophosphatidylcholine is found in small amounts in most tissues. It is formed by hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by the enzyme phospholipase A2, as part of the de-acylation/re-acylation cycle that controls its overall molecular species composition. It can also be formed inadvertently during extraction of lipids from tissues if the phospholipase is activated by careless handling. In blood plasma significant amounts of lysophosphatidylcholine are formed by a specific enzyme system, lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), which is secreted from the liver. The enzyme catalyzes the transfer of the fatty acids of position sn-2 of phosphatidylcholine to the free cholesterol in plasma, with formation of cholesterol esters and lysophosphatidylcholine. Lysophospholipids have a role in lipid signaling by acting on lysophospholipid receptors (LPL-R). LPL-R's are members of the G protein-coupled receptor family of integral membrane proteins.|
HMDB0010384::LysoPC(18:0) is a lysophospholipid (LyP). It is a monoglycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. Lysophosphatidylcholines can have different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 (sn-1) position. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. LysoPC(18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Lysophosphatidylcholine is found in small amounts in most tissues. It is formed by hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by the enzyme phospholipase A2, as part of the de-acylation/re-acylation cycle that controls its overall molecular species composition. It can also be formed inadvertently during extraction of lipids from tissues if the phospholipase is activated by careless handling. In blood plasma significant amounts of lysophosphatidylcholine are formed by a specific enzyme system, lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), which is secreted from the liver. The enzyme catalyzes the transfer of the fatty acids of position sn-2 of phosphatidylcholine to the free cholesterol in plasma, with formation of cholesterol esters and lysophosphatidylcholine. Lysophospholipids have a role in lipid signaling by acting on lysophospholipid receptors (LPL-R). LPL-R's are members of the G protein-coupled receptor family of integral membrane proteins.|
HMDB0010386::LysoPC(18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a lysophospholipid (LyP). It is a monoglycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. Lysophosphatidylcholines can have different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 (sn-1) position. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. LysoPC(18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Lysophosphatidylcholine is found in small amounts in most tissues. It is formed by hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by the enzyme phospholipase A2, as part of the de-acylation/re-acylation cycle that controls its overall molecular species composition. It can also be formed inadvertently during extraction of lipids from tissues if the phospholipase is activated by careless handling. In blood plasma significant amounts of lysophosphatidylcholine are formed by a specific enzyme system, lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), which is secreted from the liver. The enzyme catalyzes the transfer of the fatty acids of position sn-2 of phosphatidylcholine to the free cholesterol in plasma, with formation of cholesterol esters and lysophosphatidylcholine. Lysophospholipids have a role in lipid signaling by acting on lysophospholipid receptors (LPL-R). LPL-R's are members of the G protein-coupled receptor family of integral membrane proteins.|
HMDB0010395::LysoPC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a lysophospholipid (LyP). It is a monoglycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. Lysophosphatidylcholines can have different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 (sn-1) position. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. LysoPC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Lysophosphatidylcholine is found in small amounts in most tissues. It is formed by hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by the enzyme phospholipase A2, as part of the de-acylation/re-acylation cycle that controls its overall molecular species composition. It can also be formed inadvertently during extraction of lipids from tissues if the phospholipase is activated by careless handling. In blood plasma significant amounts of lysophosphatidylcholine are formed by a specific enzyme system, lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), which is secreted from the liver. The enzyme catalyzes the transfer of the fatty acids of position sn-2 of phosphatidylcholine to the free cholesterol in plasma, with formation of cholesterol esters and lysophosphatidylcholine. Lysophospholipids have a role in lipid signaling by acting on lysophospholipid receptors (LPL-R). LPL-R's are members of the G protein-coupled receptor family of integral membrane proteins.|
HMDB0007867::PC(14:0/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007903::PC(14:1(9Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0000564::PC(16:0/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/16:0), in particular, consists of two chains of palmitic acid at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The palmitic acid moieties are derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. Dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine (DPPC) is the major constituent of pulmonary surfactant. It is also used for research purposes in studying liposomes, lipid bilayers, and model biological membranes. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007872::PC(14:0/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007879::PC(14:0/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007880::PC(14:0/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007881::PC(14:0/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007883::PC(14:0/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007886::PC(14:0/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007887::PC(14:0/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0000593::PC(18:1(9Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of two chains of oleic acid at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The oleic acid moieties are derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. Dioleoylphosphatidylcholine is found in human platelets and red blood cells, in mitochondria from skeletal muscle, lung, umbilical artery and vein endothelial cells (PMID: 15351277  , 7138900  , 2351875  , 4046747  , 2755318  ).While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007921::PC(14:1(9Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007889::PC(14:0/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of adrenic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007890::PC(14:0/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007892::PC(14:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosahexaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the docosahexaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007893::PC(14:0/24:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/24:0), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007894::PC(14:0/24:1(15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/24:1(15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of nervonic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008020::PC(16:1(9Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007988::PC(16:0/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of adrenic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007989::PC(16:0/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007991::PC(16:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosahexaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the docosahexaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008026::PC(16:1(9Z)/24:1(15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/24:1(15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of nervonic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008086::PC(18:1(11Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008054::PC(18:0/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of adrenic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008055::PC(18:0/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008057::PC(18:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosahexaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the docosahexaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008058::PC(18:0/24:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/24:0), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008059::PC(18:0/24:1(15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/24:1(15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of nervonic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008092::PC(18:1(11Z)/24:1(15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/24:1(15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of nervonic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008191::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/24:1(15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/24:1(15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of nervonic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008257::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/24:1(15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/24:1(15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of nervonic acid at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008288::PC(20:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosahexaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the docosahexaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013341::PC(o-14:0/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-14:0/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Myristyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The Myristyl alcohol moiety is derived from butter oil, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013402::PC(o-14:0/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-14:0/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Myristyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The Myristyl alcohol moiety is derived from butter oil, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013404::PC(o-16:0/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-16:0/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Palmityl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The Palmityl alcohol moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013411::PC(o-16:1(9Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-16:1(9Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Palmitoleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The Palmitoleyl alcohol moiety is derived from whale oil, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013405::PC(o-16:0/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-16:0/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Palmityl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The Palmityl alcohol moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013412::PC(o-16:1(9Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-16:1(9Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Palmitoleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The Palmitoleyl alcohol moiety is derived from whale oil, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0011151::PC(O-16:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is an ether lipid. Ether lipids are lipids in which one or more of the carbon atoms on glycerol is bonded to an alkyl chain via an ether linkage, as opposed to the usual ester linkage.Phosphatidylcholines are a class of phospholipids which incorporate choline as a headgroup. They are a major component of biological membranes and can be isolated from either egg yolk (in Greek lekithos) or soy beans from which they are mechanically extracted or chemically extracted using hexane.Phosphatidylcholines are such a major component of lecithin, that, in some contexts, the terms are sometime used as synonyms. However, lecithin extract consists of a mixture of phosphatidylcholine and other compounds. It is also used along with sodium taurocholate for simulating fed- and fasted-state biorelevant media in dissolution studies of highly-lipophilic drugs.| Phosphatidylcholine is a major constituent of cell membranes, and also plays a role in membrane-mediated cell signalling.Phospholipase D catalyzes the hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine to form phosphatidic acid (PA), releasing the soluble choline headgroup into the cytosol. Some medical researchers are experimenting with using Phosphatidylcholine in a type of injection that will break down fat cells; to be used as an alternative to liposuction known as Injection lipolysis. (Wikipedia)While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013413::PC(o-16:1(9Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-16:1(9Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Palmitoleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The Palmitoleyl alcohol moiety is derived from whale oil, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013406::PC(o-16:0/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-16:0/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Palmityl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The Palmityl alcohol moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013414::PC(o-16:1(9Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-16:1(9Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Palmitoleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The Palmitoleyl alcohol moiety is derived from whale oil, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013418::PC(o-18:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Stearyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The Stearyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, fish oil, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013425::PC(o-18:1(11Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:1(11Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Vaccenyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The Vaccenyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013407::PC(o-16:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-16:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Palmityl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The Palmityl alcohol moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the eicosatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013415::PC(o-16:1(9Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-16:1(9Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Palmitoleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The Palmitoleyl alcohol moiety is derived from whale oil, while the eicosatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013408::PC(o-16:0/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-16:0/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Palmityl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The Palmityl alcohol moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013416::PC(o-16:1(9Z)/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-16:1(9Z)/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Palmitoleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The Palmitoleyl alcohol moiety is derived from whale oil, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013431::PC(o-18:1(9Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:1(9Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Oleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The Oleyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, fish oil, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013440::PC(o-20:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-20:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Arachidyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The Arachidyl alcohol moiety is derived from corn oil, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013420::PC(o-18:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Stearyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The Stearyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, fish oil, while the eicosatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013432::PC(o-18:1(9Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:1(9Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Oleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The Oleyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, fish oil, while the eicosatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013409::PC(o-16:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-16:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Palmityl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of docosahexaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The Palmityl alcohol moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the docosahexaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013433::PC(o-18:1(9Z)/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:1(9Z)/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Oleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The Oleyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, fish oil, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013437::PC(o-18:2(9Z,12Z)/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:2(9Z,12Z)/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Linoleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The Linoleyl alcohol moiety is derived from seed oils, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013446::PC(o-22:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-22:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Behenyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The Behenyl alcohol moiety is derived from Rice bran, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013442::PC(o-20:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-20:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Arachidyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The Arachidyl alcohol moiety is derived from corn oil, while the eicosatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013444::PC(o-20:1(11Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-20:1(11Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Eicosenyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The Eicosenyl alcohol moiety is derived from vegetable oil, while the eicosatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013422::PC(o-18:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Stearyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of docosahexaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The Stearyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, fish oil, while the docosahexaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013434::PC(o-18:1(9Z)/24:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:1(9Z)/24:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Oleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-2 position. The Oleyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, fish oil, while the lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013438::PC(o-18:2(9Z,12Z)/24:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:2(9Z,12Z)/24:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Linoleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-2 position. The Linoleyl alcohol moiety is derived from seed oils, while the lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013458::PC(o-24:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-24:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Lignoceryl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The Lignoceryl alcohol moiety is derived from plant waxes and beeswax, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013451::PC(o-22:1(13Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-22:1(13Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Erucyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The Erucyl alcohol moiety is derived from Rapeseed oil, while the eicosatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013449::PC(o-22:0/22:3(10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-22:0/22:3(10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Behenyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of (10Z,13Z,16Z-docosatrienoyl) at the C-2 position. The Behenyl alcohol moiety is derived from Rice bran, while the (10Z,13Z,16Z-docosatrienoyl) moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013453::PC(o-22:1(13Z)/22:3(10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-22:1(13Z)/22:3(10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Erucyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of (10Z,13Z,16Z-docosatrienoyl) at the C-2 position. The Erucyl alcohol moiety is derived from Rapeseed oil, while the (10Z,13Z,16Z-docosatrienoyl) moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013456::PC(o-22:2(13Z,16Z)/22:3(10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-22:2(13Z,16Z)/22:3(10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Docosadienyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of (10Z,13Z,16Z-docosatrienoyl) at the C-2 position. The Docosadienyl alcohol moiety is derived from animal fat, while the (10Z,13Z,16Z-docosatrienoyl) moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013450::PC(o-22:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-22:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Behenyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of docosahexaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The Behenyl alcohol moiety is derived from Rice bran, while the docosahexaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013462::Sphingomyelin (d18:0/14:1(9Z)(OH)) or SM(d18:0/14:1(9Z)(OH)) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. It usually consists of phosphorylcholine and ceramide. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0013463::Sphingomyelin (d18:0/16:1(9Z)(OH)) or SM(d18:0/16:1(9Z)(OH)) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. It usually consists of phosphorylcholine and ceramide. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0013466::Sphingomyelin (d18:0/22:1(13Z)(OH)) or SM(d18:0/22:1(13Z)(OH)) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. It usually consists of phosphorylcholine and ceramide. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0013467::Sphingomyelin (d18:0/22:2(13Z,16Z)(OH)) or SM(d18:0/22:2(13Z,16Z)(OH)) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. It usually consists of phosphorylcholine and ceramide. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0013469::Sphingomyelin (d18:0/24:1(15Z)(OH))or SM(d18:0/24:1(15Z)(OH)) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. It usually consists of phosphorylcholine and ceramide. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0010169::Sphingomyelin (d18:1/16:0) or SM(d18:1/16:0) is a sphingomyelin. Sphingomyelin (SM or SPH) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. It usually consists of phosphorylcholine and ceramide. SM(18:1/16:0) consists of oleic acid attached to the C1 position and palmitic acid attached to the C2 position. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0013464::Sphingomyelin (d18:0/16:1(9Z)) or SM(d18:0/16:1(9Z)) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. It usually consists of phosphorylcholine and ceramide. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0001348::Sphingomyelin (d18:1/18:0) or SM(d18:1/18:0) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. It usually consists of phosphorylcholine and ceramide. SM(18:1/18:0) consists of oleic acid attached to the C1 position and stearic acid attached to the C2 position. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0012101::Sphingomyelin (d18:1/18:1(9Z))or SM(d18:1/18:1(9Z)) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. It usually consists of phosphorylcholine and ceramide. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0013465::Sphingomyelin (d18:0/20:2(11Z,14Z)) or SM(d18:0/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. It usually consists of phosphorylcholine and ceramide. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0013468::Sphingomyelin (d18:0/22:3(10Z,13Z,16Z)) or SM (d18:0/22:3(10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. It usually consists of phosphorylcholine and ceramide. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0011697::Sphingomyelin (d18:1/24:0) or SM(d18:1/24:0) is a sphingomyelin. Sphingomyelin (SM or SPH) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. It usually consists of phosphorylcholine and ceramide. SM(18:1/16:0) consists of oleic acid attached to the C1 position and palmitic acid attached to the C2 position. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0012107::Sphingomyelin (d18:1/24:1(15Z)) or SM(d18:1/24:1(15Z)) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. It usually consists of phosphorylcholine and ceramide. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0011698::SM(d18:1/26:0) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. It usually consists of phosphorylcholine and ceramide. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0013461::Sphingomyelin (d18:0/26:1(17Z)) or SM(d18:0/26:1(17Z)) is a type of sphingolipid found in animal cell membranes, especially in the membranous myelin sheath which surrounds some nerve cell axons. In humans, sphingomyelin is the only membrane phospholipid not derived from glycerol. Like all sphingolipids, SPH has a ceramide core (sphingosine bonded to a fatty acid via an amide linkage). In addition it contains one polar head group, which is either phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine. The plasma membrane of cells is highly enriched in sphingomyelin and is considered largely to be found in the exoplasmic leaflet of the cell membrane. However, there is some evidence that there may also be a sphingomyelin pool in the inner leaflet of the membrane. Moreover, neutral sphingomyelinase-2 - an enzyme that breaks down sphingomyelin into ceramide has been found to localise exclusively to the inner leaflet further suggesting that there may be sphingomyelin present there. Sphingomyelin can accumulate in a rare hereditary disease called Niemann-Pick Disease, types A and B. Niemann-Pick disease is a genetically-inherited disease caused by a deficiency in the enzyme Sphingomyelinase, which causes the accumulation of Sphingomyelin in spleen, liver, lungs, bone marrow, and the brain, causing irreversible neurological damage. SMs play a role in signal transduction. Sphingomyelins are synthesized by the transfer of phosphorylcholine from phosphatidylcholine to a ceramide in a reaction catalyzed by sphingomyelin synthase.|
HMDB0030396::(±)-Tryptophan is a dietary supplement, nutrient.Tryptophan is one of the 20 standard amino acids, as well as an essential amino acid in the human diet. Only the L-stereoisomer of tryptophan is used in structural or enzyme proteins, but the D-stereoisomer is occasionally found in naturally produced peptides (for example, the marine venom peptide contryphan). (Wikipedia|
HMDB0003357::N-Acetylornithine is a minor component of deproteinized blood plasma of human blood. Human blood plasma contains a variable amount of acetylornithine, averaging 1.1 +/- 0.4 mumol/L (range 0.8--0.2 mumol/L). Urine contains a very small amount of acetylornithine, approximately 1 nmol/mg creatinine (1 mumol/day) (PMID: 508804  ).|
HMDB0000669::Ortho-hydroxyphenylacetic acid, also known as (o-hydroxyphenyl)acetate or 2-hydroxybenzeneacetic acid, is a member of the class of compounds known as 2(hydroxyphenyl)acetic acids. 2(hydroxyphenyl)acetic acids are phenylacetic acids that carry a hydroxyl group at the 2-position. Ortho-hydroxyphenylacetic acid is slightly soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Ortho-hydroxyphenylacetic acid can be found in a number of food items such as natal plum, lemon verbena, half-highbush blueberry, and parsley, which makes ortho-hydroxyphenylacetic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. Ortho-hydroxyphenylacetic acid can be found primarily in blood, feces, and urine. Moreover, ortho-hydroxyphenylacetic acid is found to be associated with phenylketonuria, which is an inborn error of metabolism. ortho-Hydroxyphenylacetic acid is a substrate of the enzyme oxidoreductases (EC 1.14.13.-) in the pathway styrene degradation (KEGG).|
HMDB0000005::2-Ketobutyric acid is a substance that is involved in the metabolism of many amino acids (glycine, methionine, valine, leucine, serine, threonine, isoleucine) as well as propanoate metabolism and C-5 branched dibasic acid metabolism. More specifically, alpha-ketobutyric acid is a product of the lysis of cystathionine. It is also one of the degradation products of threonine. It can be converted into propionyl-CoA (and subsequently methylmalonyl CoA, which can be converted into succinyl CoA, a citric acid cycle intermediate), and thus enter the citric acid cycle.|
HMDB0011743::2-Phenylpropionate is an intermediate in alpha-Methylstyrene (2-phenylpropylene) metabolism. It was identified in human liver slices in small amounts. It is. likely that 2-Phenylpropionate derives from 2-phenylpropionaldehyde, formed from a. 1,2-hydride shift during the transfer of active oxygen to the vinyl. group, as has been proposed for the cytochrome P450-mediated oxidation. of styrene to form phenylacetaldehyde. (PMID: 11159807  ).|
HMDB0003391::2-Phospho-D-glycerate or 2PG is an intermediate in gluconeogenesis. It is a glyceric acid which serves as the substrate in the ninth step of glycolysis. 2PG is converted by enolase into phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), the penultimate step in the conversion of glucose to pyruvate. More specifically, 2PG can be generated from Glycerate-3-phosphate via phosphoglycerate mutase or from phosphoenolpyrvate via alpha enolase.|
HMDB0001867::4-Aminohippuric acid is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction:. acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycine. Renal proximal tubules secrete various organic anions, including drugs and p-aminohippurate (PAH). Uptake of PAH from blood into tubule cells occurs by exchange with intracellular alpha-ketoglutarate and is mediated by the organic anion transporter 1. PAH exit into tubule lumen is species specific and may involve ATP-independent and -dependent transporters. (PMID 11443229  ). Enhanced secretion of p-aminohippuric acid occurs in Fanconi's syndrome (FS). FS is associated with numerous varieties of inherited and acquired conditions; FS is characterized by a generalized transport defect in the proximal tubules, leading to renal losses of glucose, phosphate, calcium, uric acid, amino acids, bicarbonates, and other organic compounds. (PMID 12552490  ).|
HMDB0001341::Adenosine diphosphate, abbreviated ADP, is a nucleotide. It is an ester of pyrophosphoric acid with the nucleotide adenine. ADP consists of the pyrophosphate group, the pentose sugar ribose, and the nucleobase adenine. ADP is the product of ATP dephosphorylation by ATPases. ADP is converted back to ATP by ATP synthases.|
HMDB0001511::Phosphocreatine undergoes irreversible cyclization and dehydration to form creatinine at a fractional rate of 0.026 per day, thus forming approximately 2 g creatinine/day in an adult male. This is the amount of creatine that must be provided either from dietary sources or by endogenous synthesis to maintain the body pool of (creatine and) phosphocreatine. Creatine is an amino acid that plays a vital role as phosphocreatine in regenerating adenosine triphosphate in skeletal muscle to energize muscle contraction. Creatine is phosphorylated to phosphocreatine in muscle in a reaction that is catalyzed by the enzyme creatine kinase. This enzyme is in highest concentration in muscle and nerve. Oral administration increases muscle stores. During the past decade, creatine has assumed prominence as an ergogenic (and legal) aid for professional and elite athletes. Most (~ 95%) of the total body creatine-phosphocreatine pool is in muscle (more in skeletal muscle than in smooth muscle) and amounts to 120 g (or 925 mmol) in a 70 kg adult male. Approximately 60-67% of the content in resting muscle is in the phosphorylated form. This generates enough ATP at the myofibrillar apparatus to power about 4 seconds of muscle contraction in exercise. Phosphocreatine reacts with ADP to yield ATP and creatine; the reversible reaction is catalyzed by creatine kinase. phosphocreatine is the chief store of high-energy phosphates in muscle. Thus, this reaction, which permits the rephosphorylation of ADP to ATP, is the immediate source of energy in muscle contraction. During rest, metabolic processes regenerate phosphocreatine stores. In normal muscle, ATP that is broken down to ADP is immediately rephosphorylated to ATP. Thus, phosphocreatine serves as a reservoir of ATP-synthesizing potential.| phosphocreatine is the only fuel available to precipitously regenerate ATP during episodes of rapid fluctuations in demand. The availability of phosphocreatine likely limits muscle performance during brief, high-power exercise, i.e., maximal exercise of short duration. With near maximal isometric contraction, the rate of utilization of phosphocreatine declines after 1-2 seconds of contraction, prior to the glycolysis peak at approximately 3 seconds. (PMID: 10079702  , Nutr Rev. 1999 Feb;57(2):45-50.).|
HMDB0004983::Dimethyl sulfone (DMSO2) or methylsulfonylmethane (MSM), is an organic sulfur compound belonging to a class of chemicals known as sulfones. It occurs naturally in some primitive plants and is present in small amounts in many foods and beverages. DMSO2 reflects its close chemical relationship to dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), which differs only in the oxidation state of the sulfur atom. DMSO2 is the primary metabolite of DMSO in humans, and it shares some of the properties of DMSO. Dimethyl sulfone is a metabolite occurring in plasma and CSF of normal human. It derives from dietary sources, from intestinal bacterial metabolism and from human endogenous methanethiol metabolism. (PMID 15996001  ).|
HMDB0001871::Epicatechin is an antioxidant flavonoid, occurring especially in woody plants as both (+)-catechin and (-)-epicatechin (cis) forms. Catechin is a tannin peculiar to green and white tea because the black tea oxidation process reduces catechins in black tea. Catechin is a powerful, water soluble polyphenol and antioxidant that is easily oxidized. Several thousand types are available in the plant world. As many as two thousand are known to have a flavon structure and are called flavonoids. Catechin is one of them. Green tea is manufactured from fresh, unfermented tea leaves; the oxidation of catechins is minimal, and hence they are able to serve as antioxidants. Researchers believe that catechin is effective because it easily sticks to proteins, blocking bacteria from adhering to cell walls and disrupting their ability to destroy them. Viruses have hooks on their surfaces and can attach to cell walls. The catechin in green tea prevents viruses from adhering and causing harm. Catechin reacts with toxins created by harmful bacteria (many of which belong to the protein family) and harmful metals such as lead, mercury, chrome, and cadmium. From its NMR espectra, there is a doubt on 2 and 3 atoms configuration. It seems to be that they are in trans position.|
HMDB0000639::Galactaric acid, also known as mucic acid or galactarate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as glucuronic acid derivatives. Glucuronic acid derivatives are compounds containing a glucuronic acid moiety (or a derivative), which consists of a glucose moiety with the C6 carbon oxidized to a carboxylic acid. Galactaric acid exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). Galactaric acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as saliva, urine, and blood. Within the cell, galactaric acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Galactaric acid is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, 2-(e)-O-feruloyl-D-galactaric acid, O-feruloylgalactaric acid, and galactaric acid derivative. |
HMDB0000663::Glucaric acid, also known as D-saccharic acid or glucarate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as glucuronic acid derivatives. Glucuronic acid derivatives are compounds containing a glucuronic acid moiety (or a derivative), which consists of a glucose moiety with the C6 carbon oxidized to a carboxylic acid. Glucaric acid is soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). Glucaric acid has been found in human prostate and liver tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, glucaric acid is primarily located in the mitochondria. Glucaric acid is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-D-glucaric acid, 5-dehydro-4-deoxy-D-glucaric acid, and D-glucaro-1,5-lactone. |
HMDB0000858::Monomethyl glutaric acid is a metabolitelism of dibasic esters(DBEs) by nasal respiratory and olfactory mucosae in vitro demonstrated that hydrolysis of DBEs yields mainly the monomethyl esters (monomethyl adipate, monomethyl. glutarate, and monomethyl succinate). PMCID: 1568341.|
HMDB0000676::Homocystine is the double-bonded form of homocysteine, but it occurs only transiently before being converted to the harmless cystathionine via a vitamin B6-dependent enzyme. Homocystine and homocysteine-cysteine mixed disulfide account for >98% of total homocysteine in plasma from healthy individuals (PMID 11592966  ). Oxidation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) is thought to be a major factor in the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis. Elevated plasma homocysteine is an accepted risk factor for atherosclerosis, and may act through LDL oxidation, although this is controversial. However, the major thiol in plasma is cysteine, which is present at concentrations approximately 10 times greater than homocysteine; therefore homocystine in plasma is insignificant, and consequently homocystine is unlikely to influence LDL oxidation in vivo (PMID 14732479  ). Increasing evidence supports a role for an elevation of homocysteine in schizophrenia. It has been demonstrated that neural tube defects are related to a genetic defect in homocysteine metabolism. Sufficient intake of folic acid is believed to reduce this risk by enhancing methylation of homocysteine and its conversion to methionine, thereby compensating for this genetic defect (homocystinuria). Plasma homocysteine levels are elevated when folate levels are in the lower half of the normal range (PMID 16143442  ).|
HMDB0001925::Ibuprofen is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) widely marketed under various trademarks including Act-3, Advil, Brufen, Motrin, Nuprin, and Nurofen. It is used for relief of symptoms of arthritis, primary dysmenorrhoea, and fever; Ibuprofen is an NSAID which is believed to work through inhibition of cyclooxygenase (COX), thus inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis. There are at least 2 variations of cyclooxygenase (COX-1 and COX-2), ibuprofen inhibits both COX-1 and COX-2. It appears that its analgesic, antipyretic, and anti-inflammatory activity are achieved principally through COX-2 inhibition; whereas COX-1 inhibition is responsible for its unwanted effects on platelet aggregation and the GI mucosa. As with other NSAIDs, ibuprofen inhibits platelet aggregation, but is not used therapeutically for this action since it is a minor and reversible effect. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0000186::alpha-Lactose is the major sugar present in milk and the main source of energy supplied to the newborn mammalian in its mother's milk. Lactose is also an important osmotic regulator of lactation. It is digested by the intestinal lactase (EC 3.2.1.108), an enzyme expressed in newborns. Its activity declines following weaning. As a result, adult mammals are normally lactose-intolerant and more than 75% of the human adult population suffers from lactase deficiency. Lactase deficiency is present in up to 80 percent of blacks and Latinos, and up to 100 percent of American Indians and Asians.| Persons with lactose intolerance are unable to digest significant amounts of lactose. Common symptoms include abdominal pain and bloating, excessive flatus, and watery stool following the ingestion of foods containing lactose. A sizable number of adults believe they are lactose intolerant but do not actually have impaired lactose digestion, and some persons with lactase deficiency can tolerate moderate amounts of ingested lactose. A diagnosis of lactose intolerance can usually be made with a careful history supported by dietary manipulation. If necessary, diagnosis can be confirmed by using a breath hydrogen or lactose tolerance test. These mostly uncomfortable symptoms of lactose maldigestion are blamed for a variably dairy consumption. There is, however, emerging evidence that certain lactic acid-producing bacteria, which selectively consume prebiotics, may be beneficial against some lower intestinal diseases. Lactose maldigestion and lactose should perhaps be re-evaluated as a potential provider of such a prebiotic. Treatment consists primarily of avoiding lactose-containing foods. Lactase enzyme supplements may be helpful. The degree of lactose malabsorption varies greatly among patients with lactose intolerance, but most of them can ingest up to 350 mL of milk daily without symptoms. Lactose-intolerant patients must ensure adequate calcium intake. (PMID: 13130292  , 12216958  , 12197838  , 12018807  ). Lactose in the urine is a biomarker for the consumption of milk.|
HMDB0000176::Maleic acid is an industrial raw material for the production of glyoxylic acid by ozonolysis. Maleic acid is an organic compound which is a dicarboxylic acid (molecule with two carboxyl groups). The molecule consists of an ethylene group flanked by two carboxylic acid groups. Maleic acid is the cis isomer of butenedioic acid, whereas fumaric acid is the trans isomer. The cis isomer is the less stable one of the two; the difference in heat of combustion is 22.7 kJ/mol. The physical properties of maleic acid are very different from that of fumaric acid. Maleic acid is soluble in water whereas fumaric acid is not and the melting point of maleic acid (130 - 131 degree centigrade) is also much lower than that of fumaric acid (287 degree centigrade). Both properties of maleic acid can be explained on account of the intramolecular hydrogen bonding that takes place at the expense of intermolecular interactions. Maleic acid is converted into maleic anhydride by dehydration, to malic acid by hydration, and to succinic acid by hydrogenation. It reacts with thionyl chloride or phosphorus pentachloride to give the maleic acid chloride (it is not possible to isolate the mono acid chloride). Maleic acid is a reactant in many Diels-Alder reactions.|
HMDB0001522::Methylguanidine (MG) is a guanidine compound deriving from protein catabolism. It is also a product of putrefaction. Methylguanidine is a suspected uraemic toxin that accumulates in renal failure, however it also exhibits anti-inflammatory effects. Methylguanidine is synthesized from creatinine concomitant with the synthesis of hydrogen peroxide from endogenous substrates in peroxisomes. Recent evidence suggests that methylguanidine significantly inhibits iNOS activity and TNF- release. This means that methylguandine can attenuate the degree of inflammation and tissue damage associated with endotoxic shock.|
HMDB0000821::Phenylacetylglycine is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction:. acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycine. Phenylacetylglycine or PAG is a glycine conjugate of phenylacetic acid. Phenylacetic acid may arise from exposure to styrene (plastic) or through the consumption of fruits and vegetables. Phenylacetic acid is used in some perfumes, possessing a honey-like odour in low concentrations, and is also used in penicillin G production. PAG is a putative biomarker of phospholipidosis. Urinary PAG is elevated in animals exhibiting abnormal phospholipid accumulation in many tissues and may thus be useful as a surrogate biomarker for phospholipidosis. (PMID: 15764292  ) The presence of phenylacetylglycine in urine has been confirmed for dogs, rats and mice. However, the presence of this compound in human urine is controversial. GC-MS studies have not found this compound (PMID: 7492634  ) while NMR studies claimed to have identified it (PMID: 21167146  ). It appears that phenylacetylglycine may sometimes be mistaken for phenylacetylglutamine via NMR.|
HMDB0000272::The phosphoric acid ester of serine. As a constituent (residue) of proteins, its side chain can undergo O-linked glycosylation. This might be important in explaining some of the devastating consequences of diabetes. It is one of three amino acid residues that are commonly phosphorylated by kinases during cell signalling in eukaryotes. Phosphorylated serine residues are often referred to as phosphoserine. Serine proteases are a common type of protease. Serine, organic compound, one of the 20 amino acids commonly found in animal proteins. Only the L-stereoisomer appears in mammalian protein. It is not essential to the human diet, since it can be synthesized in the body from other metabolites, including glycine. Serine was first obtained from silk protein, a particularly rich source, in 1865. Its name is derived from the Latin for silk, sericum. Serine's structure was established in 1902.|
HMDB0000731::Cysteine-S-sulfate (SSC) is produced by reaction of inorganic sulfite and cystine by a yet unknown pathway and is a very potent NMDA-receptor agonist. Electrophysiological studies have shown that SSC displays depolarizing properties similar to glutamate. Patients affected with either Molybdenum cofactor deficiency (MOCOD, an autosomal recessive disease that leads to a combined deficiency of the enzymes sulphite oxidase, an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of sulfite to inorganic sulfate, xanthine dehydrogenase and aldehyde oxidase) or isolated sulphite oxidase deficiency (ISOD, an extremely rare autosomal recessive disorder with identical clinical manifestations to MOCOD) excrete elevated levels of SSC. This rare disorder is associated with brain damage (seizures, spastic quadriplegia, and cerebral atrophy), mental retardation, dislocated ocular lenses, blindness, and excretion in the urine of abnormally large amounts of SSC, sulfite, and thiosulfate but no inorganic sulfate (PMID: 17764028  , 15558695  ).|
HMDB0000635::Succinylacetone, also known as 4,6-dioxoheptanoic acid or SUAC, belongs to the class of compounds known as medium-chain keto acids and derivatives. These are keto acids with 6 to 12 carbon atoms. Succinylacetone is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Succinylacetone has been detected in amniotic fluid, blood, and urine. Within the cell, succinylacetone is primarily located in the cytoplasm (predicted from logP). Succinylacetone can be created by the oxidation of glycine, and is a precursor of methylglyoxal (Wikipedia). Succinylacetone is an abnormal tyrosine metabolite that arises from defects in the enzyme called fumarylacetoacetase (PMID: 16448836  ). Fumarylacetoacetase normally catalyzes the hydrolysis of 4-fumarylacetoacetate into fumarate and acetoacetate. If present in sufficiently high levels, succinylacetone can act as an acidogen, an oncometabolite, and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. An oncometabolite is an endogenous metabolite that causes cancer. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels.| Chronically high levels of succinylacetone are associated with tyrosinemia type I. Type I tyrosinemia is an inherited metabolism disorder due to a shortage of the enzyme fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase that is needed to break down tyrosine. Patients usually develop features such as hepatic necrosis, renal tubular injury, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Neurologic and dermatologic manifestations are also possible. The urine has an odour of cabbage or rancid butter. Succinylacetone is a keto-acid, which is a subclass of organic acids. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart, liver, and kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of untreated tyrosinemia. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. Succinylacetone appears to function as an oncometabolite (similar in function to succinate, another oncometabolite) as patients with high levels of this compound often develop hepatocellular carcinoma (PMID: 20003495  ).|
HMDB0001878::Thymol is a phenol obtained from thyme oil or other volatile oils. It is used as a stabilizer in pharmaceutic preparations. It has been used for its antiseptic, antibacterial, and antifungal actions, and was formerly used as a vermifuge. (Dorland, 28th ed) -- Pubchem; Thymol is a monoterpene phenol derivative of cymene, C10H13OH, isomeric with carvacrol, found in oil of thyme, and extracted as a white crystalline substance of a pleasant aromatic odor and strong antiseptic properties. It is also called "hydroxy cymene". (from Webster's 1913 dictionary) -- Wikipedia; In a 1994 report released by five top cigarette companies, thymol is one of the 599 additives to cigarettes. Its use or purpose, however, is unknown, like most cigarette additives. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0001987::2-Hydroxy-2-methylbutyric acid is an unusual metabolite found in the urine of patients with 2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria and maple syrup urine disease. 2-Hydroxy-2-methylbutyric acid is also a secondary metabolite found in human urine after exposure to the gasoline additive tert-amyl-Me-ether (TAME). (PMID 11504147  , 10828258  , 9260660  , 11482739  ).|
HMDB0002453::4-Deoxythreonic acid is a normally occurring carboxylic acid in human. (PMID: 3829393  , 6725493  ). Metabolic profiling of urinary organic acids from patients with juvenile-onset (Type 1) diabetes mellitus have revealed significantly elevated levels of 4-deoxythreonic acid. (PMID: 2947647  ). The normal urinary constituent 4-deoxythreonic acid was found to diminish in urine incubated with E. coli. (PMID: 3910670  ).|
HMDB0001713::m-Coumaric acid is a polyphenol metabolite from caffeic acid, formed by the gut microflora and the amount in human biofluids is diet-dependant. m-Coumaric acid is transported by the monocarboxylic acid transporter (MCT). MCT-mediated absorption of phenolic compounds per se and their colonic metabolites would exert significant impact on human health. (PMID 16870009  , 15479001  , 15479001  ).|
HMDB0001431::The 4-aminomethyl form of vitamin B6. During transamination of amino acids, pyridoxal phosphate is transiently converted into pyridoxamine phosphate. -- Pubchem; Pyridoxamine is one of the compounds that can be called vitamin B6, along with Pyridoxal and Pyridoxine. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0003276::Hydrogen sulfide is a highly toxic and flammable gas. Because it is heavier than air it tends to accumulate at the bottom of poorly ventilated spaces. Although very pungent at first, it quickly deadens the sense of smell, so potential victims may be unaware of its presence until it is too late. H2S arises from virtually anywhere where elemental sulfur comes into contact with organic material, especially at high temperatures. Hydrogen sulfide is a covalent hydride chemically related to water (H2O) since oxygen and sulfur occur in the same periodic table group. It often results when bacteria break down organic matter in the absence of oxygen, such as in swamps, and sewers (alongside the process of anaerobic digestion). It also occurs in volcanic gases, natural gas and some well waters. It is also important to note that Hydrogen sulfide is a central participant in the sulfur cycle, the biogeochemical cycle of sulfur on Earth. As mentioned above, sulfur-reducing and sulfate-reducing bacteria derive energy from oxidizing hydrogen or organic molecules in the absence of oxygen by reducing sulfur or sulfate to hydrogen sulfide. Other bacteria liberate hydrogen sulfide from sulfur-containing amino acids. Several groups of bacteria can use hydrogen sulfide as fuel, oxidizing it to elemental sulfur or to sulfate by using oxygen or nitrate as oxidant. The purple sulfur bacteria and the green sulfur bacteria use hydrogen sulfide as electron donor in photosynthesis, thereby producing elemental sulfur. (In fact, this mode of photosynthesis is older than the mode of cyanobacteria, algae and plants which uses water as electron donor and liberates oxygen).|
HMDB0000730::Isobutyrylglycine is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction: acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycine. Isobutyrylglycine is identified in large amount in urine of patients with isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency. Isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency is a disorder caused by the deficiency of isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase that is involved in the catabolism of the branched-chain amino acid valine (PMID 15505379  ). Moreover, Isobutyrylglycine is found to be associated with ethylmalonic encephalopathy and propionic acidemia, which are also inborn errors of metabolism. Isobutyrylglycine is a biomarker for the consumption of cheese.|
HMDB0000490::Etiocholanolone is the 5-beta-reduced isomer of androsterone. Etiocholanolone is a major metabolite of testosterone and androstenedione in many mammalian species including humans. It is excreted in the urine and is androgenically inactive. Classified a ketosteroid, it causes fever (it is a pyrogen), immunostimulation and leukocytosis. The pyrogenic effect of Etiocholanolone has been shown to be due to the release of interleukin-1 (IL-1) from the leukocytes that are mobilized in response to its production or injection. Etiocholanolone has anticonvulsant activity and may be an endogenous modulator of seizure susceptibility. Significantly increased values of etiocholanolone (along with testoterone and androsterone) an be detected in the urine of men with androgenic alopecia (male pattern baldness).|
HMDB0012895::Arginine vasopressin (AVP), also known as vasopressin, argipressin or antidiuretic hormone (ADH), is a hormone found in most mammals, including humans. Vasopressin is a peptide hormone that controls the reabsorption of molecules in the tubules of the kidneys by affecting the tissue's permeability. It also increases peripheral vascular resistance, which in turn increases arterial blood pressure. It plays a key role in homeostasis, and the regulation of water, glucose, and salts in the blood. It is derived from a preprohormone precursor that is synthesized in the hypothalamus and stored in vesicles at the posterior pituitary. Most of it is stored in the posterior pituitary to be released into the bloodstream; however, some AVP is also released directly into the brain. This is a sample structure of fraction 1-8 of the peptide chain.|
HMDB0013072::Somatostatin is a peptide hormone that regulates the endocrine system and affects neurotransmission and cell proliferation via interaction with G protein-coupled somatostatin receptors and inhibition of the release of numerous secondary hormones. Somatostatin has two active forms produced by alternative cleavage of a single preproprotein: one of 14 amino acids, the other of 28 amino acids|
HMDB0002329::Oxalic acid is a strong dicarboxylic acid occurring in many plants and vegetables. It is produced in the body by metabolism of glyoxylic acid or ascorbic acid. It is not metabolized but excreted in the urine. It is used as an analytical reagent and general reducing agent (Pubchem). Oxalic acid (IUPAC name: ethanedioic acid, formula H2C2O4) is a dicarboxylic acid with structure (HOOC)-(COOH). Because of the joining of two carboxyl groups, this is one of the strongest organic acids. It is also a reducing agent. The anions of oxalic acid as well as its salts and esters are known as oxalates (Wikipedia). Bodily oxalic acid may also be synthesized via the metabolism of either glyoxylic acid or unused ascorbic acid (vitamin C), which is a serious health consideration for long term megadosers of vitamin C supplements. 80% of kidney stones are formed from calcium oxalate. Some Aspergillus species produce oxalic acid, which reacts with blood or tissue calcium to precipitate calcium oxalate. There is some preliminary evidence that the administration of probiotics can affect oxalic acid excretion rates (and presumably oxalic acid levels as well) (Wikipedia). Oxalic acid is found to be associated with fumarase deficiency and primary hyperoxaluria I, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0000565::Galactonic acid is a sugar acid that is a metabolic breakdown product of galactose. Galactose dehydrogenase is responsible for converting galactose to galactonolactone, which then spontaneously or enzymatically converts to galactonic acid. Once formed, galactonic acid may enter the pentose phosphate pathway. Galactonic acid is increased in red blood cells of galactosemic patients, due to a galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT) deficiency (PMID: 14680973  , OMMBID: The Online Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, Ch.72). When present in sufficiently high levels, galactonic acid can act as an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of galactonic acid are associated with at least two inborn errors of metabolism, including galactosemia and galactosemia type II. Galactonic acid is an organic acid. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart abnormalities, liver abnormalities (jaundice), kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of untreated galactosemia. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. High levels of galactonic acid in infants are specifically associated with hepatomegaly (an enlarged liver), cirrhosis, renal failure, cataracts, vomiting, seizure, hypoglycemia, lethargy, brain damage, and ovarian failure.|
HMDB0006372::L-glyceric acid is a human urinary metabolite present in patients with L-Glyceric aciduria. The formation of L-glyceric acid from accumulated hydroxypyruvate is due to deficiency of human glyoxylate reductase/hydroxypyruvate reductase (GRHPR, EC 1.1.1.81), a D-2-hydroxy-acid dehydrogenase that plays a critical role in the removal of the metabolic by-product glyoxylate from within the liver. Deficiency of this enzyme is the underlying cause of primary hyperoxaluria type 2 (PH2) and leads to increased urinary oxalate levels, formation of kidney stones and renal failure. (PMID: 16756993  ).|
HMDB0000428::3-Hydroxyglutaric acid is a member of the class of compounds known as dicarboxylic acids and derivatives. These are organic compounds containing exactly two carboxylic acid groups. 3-Hydroxyglutaric acid is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). When present in sufficiently high levels, 3-hydroxyglutaric acid can act as act as an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels.| Chronically high levels of 3-hydroxyglutaric acid are associated with glutaric aciduria type I (glutaric acidemia type I, glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, GA1, or GAT1). GA1 is an inherited disorder in which the body is unable to completely break down the amino acids lysine, hydroxylysine and tryptophan. Excessive levels of their intermediate breakdown products (e.g. glutaric acid, glutaryl-CoA, 3-hydroxyglutaric acid, glutaconic acid) can accumulate and cause damage to the brain (and also other organs). Babies with glutaric acidemia type I are often born with unusually large heads (macrocephaly). Macrocephaly is amongst the earliest signs of GA1. GA1 also causes secondary carnitine deficiency because 3-hydroxyglutaric acid, like other organic acids, is detoxified by carnitine. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart, liver, and kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of untreated glutaric aciduria or glutaric acidemia. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures. It is believed that the excretion of 3-hydroxyglutaric acid is increased during ketosis, which occurs during glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.|
HMDB0000620::Glutaconic acid is related to the fully saturated glutaric acid and belongs to the class of compounds known as dicarboxylic acids and derivatives. These are organic compounds containing exactly two carboxylic acid groups. Glutaconic acid is soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Glutaconic acid has been detected in the urine of individuals with inborn errors of metabolism. When present in sufficiently high levels, glutaconic acid can act as an acidogen, a neurotoxin, and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A neurotoxin is a compound that is toxic to neural tissues and cells. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels.| Chronically high levels of glutaconic acid are associated with glutaric aciduria type I (glutaric acidemia type I, glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, GA1, or GAT1). GA1 is an inherited disorder in which the body is unable to completely break down the amino acids lysine, hydroxylysine and tryptophan. Excessive levels of their intermediate breakdown products (e.g. glutaric acid, glutaryl-CoA, 3-hydroxyglutaric acid, glutaconic acid) can accumulate and cause damage to the brain (and also other organs). Babies with glutaric acidemia type I are often born with unusually large heads (macrocephaly). Macrocephaly is amongst the earliest signs of GA1. GA1 also causes secondary carnitine deficiency because glutaconic acid, like other organic acids, is detoxified by carnitine. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart, liver, and kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of untreated glutaric aciduria. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures. Glutaconic acid's neurotoxicity is thought to be partially caused by an excitotoxic mechanism in which glutaconic acid overactivates N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. Accumulating trans-glutaconic (TG) acids have been proposed to be involved in the development of the striatal degeneration seen in children with glutaric acidemia type I via an excitotoxic mechanism.|
HMDB0005066::Tetradecanoylcarnitine is a human carnitine involved in b-oxidation of long-chain fatty acids (PMID: 16425363  ). Tetradecanoylcarnitine is found to be associated with glutaric aciduria II, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0006469::Linoleyl carnitine is a long-chain acyl fatty acid derivative ester of carnitine. Long-chain acyl fatty acid derivatives accumulate in the cytosol and serum of patients suffering of mitochondrial carnitine palmitoyltransferase II (CPT II, EC 2.3.1.12) deficiency, the most common inherited disorder of lipid metabolism in adults. Carnitine palmitoyltransferase II deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder of fatty acid metabolism presenting as two clinical phenotypes: (i) a severe infantile hepatocardiomuscular form and (ii) a milder adult muscular form. Energy production from long-chain fatty acids (LCFAs) requires the transport of LCFAs into the mitochondrial matrix. This transport is carnitine-dependent and involves translocation machinery. Mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation disorders cause hypoglycaemia, hepatic dysfunction, myopathy, cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy. Patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) undergoing long-term haemodialysis exhibit elevated acylcarnitine concentrations (PMID: 11999976  , 10682306  , 15025677  , 16168195  ). Moreover, linoleyl carnitine is found to be associated with glutaric aciduria II, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0013207::9-Hexadecenoylcarnitine is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. 9-hexadecenoylcarnitine can be found in blood. Within a cell, 9-hexadecenoylcarnitine is primarily located in the extracellular space and near the membrane. This compound belongs to the class of chemical entities known as fatty acid esters. These are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. 9-Hexadecenoylcarnitine is found to be associated with glutaric aciduria II, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0013326::Trans-2-dodecenoylcarnitine is classified as a member of the fatty acid esters. Fatty acid esters are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. Trans-2-dodecenoylcarnitine is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. Trans-2-dodecenoylcarnitine can be found in Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin A + D added, 0% fats, Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin A + D added, 1% fats, Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin A + D added, 2% fats, and Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin D added, 3.25% fats. Trans-2-dodecenoylcarnitine can be found in blood and urine. Within a cell, Trans-2-dodecenoylcarnitine is primarily located in the extracellular space and near the membrane. trans-2-Dodecenoylcarnitine is found to be associated with glutaric aciduria II, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0094687::Octadecenoylcarnitine, also called octadece-2-enoylcarnitine is classified as a member of the acyl carnitines. Acyl carnitines are organic compounds containing a fatty acid with the carboxylic acid attached to carnitine through an ester bond. Octadecenoylcarnitine is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and acidic. Octadecenoylcarnitine is found to be associated with glutaric aciduria II, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000429::17a-estradiol is found in the estrogen patch. The estrogen patch is a delivery system for estradiol used as hormone replacement therapy to treat the symptoms of menopause, such as hot flashes and vaginal dryness, and to prevent osteoporosis. Originally marketed as Vivelle (Novartis), it was discontinued in 2003 and reintroduced in a smaller form as Vivelle-Dot. Although the estrogen is given transdermally rather than in the standard oral tablets, the estrogen patch carries similar risks and benefits as more conventional forms of estrogen-only hormone replacement therapy. 17a-Estradiol is found to be associated with glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (GDHD), which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0001085::Leukotriene B4 is the major metabolite in neutrophil polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Leukotrienes are metabolites of arachidonic acid derived from the action of 5-LO (5-lipoxygenase). The immediate product of 5-LO is LTA4 (leukotriene A4), which is enzymatically converted into either LTB4 (leukotriene B4) by LTA4 hydrolase or LTC4 (leukotriene C4) by LTC4 synthase. The regulation of leukotriene production occurs at various levels, including expression of 5-LO, translocation of 5-LO to the perinuclear region and phosphorylation to either enhance or inhibit the activity of 5-LO. Biologically active LTB4 is metabolized by w-oxidation carried out by specific cytochrome P450s (CYP4F) followed by b-oxidation from the w-carboxy position and after CoA ester formation. Other specific pathways of leukotriene metabolism include the 12-hydroxydehydrogenase/ 15-oxo-prostaglandin-13-reductase that form a series of conjugated diene metabolites that have been observed to be excreted into human urine. Metabolism of LTC4 occurs by sequential peptide cleavage reactions involving a gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase that forms LTD4 (leukotriene D4) and a membrane-bound dipeptidase that converts LTD4 into LTE4 (leukotriene E4) before w-oxidation. These metabolic transformations of the primary leukotrienes are critical for termination of their biological activity, and defects in expression of participating enzymes may be involved in specific genetic disease. The term leukotriene was coined to indicate the presence of three conjugated double bonds within the 20-carbon structure of arachidonic acid as well as the fact that these compounds were derived from leucocytes such as PMNNs or transformed mast cells. Interestingly, most of the cells known to express 5-LO are of myeloid origin, which includes neutrophils, eosinophils, mast cells, macrophages, basophils and monocytes.| Leukotriene biosynthesis begins with the specific oxidation of arachidonic acid by a free radical mechanism as a consequence of interaction with 5-LO. The first enzymatic step involves the abstraction of a hydrogen atom from C-7 of arachidonate followed by the addition of molecular oxygen to form 5-HpETE (5-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid). A second enzymatic step is also catalysed by 5-LO and involves removal of a hydrogen atom from C-10, resulting in formation of the conjugated triene epoxide LTA4. LTA4 must then be released by 5-LO and encounter either LTA4-H (LTA4 hydrolase) or LTC4-S [LTC4 (leukotriene C4) synthase]. LTA4-H can stereospecifically add water to C-12 while retaining a specific double-bond geometry, leading to LTB4 [leukotriene B4, 5(S),12(R)-dihydroxy-6,8,10,14-(Z,E,E,Z)-eicosatetraenoic acid]. If LTA4 encounters LTC4-S, then the reactive epoxide is opened at C-6 by the thiol anion of glutathione to form the product LTC4 [5(S)-hydroxy-6(R)-S-glutathyionyl-7,9,11,14- (E,E,Z,Z)-eicosatetraenoic acid], essentially a glutathionyl adduct of oxidized arachidonic acid. Both of these terminal leukotrienes are biologically active in that specific GPCRs recognize these chemical structures and receptor recognition initiates complex intracellular signalling cascades. In order for these molecules to serve as lipid mediators, however, they must be released from the biosynthetic cell into the extracellular milieu so that they can encounter the corresponding GPCRs. Surprising features of this cascade include the recognition of the assembly of critical enzymes at the perinuclear region of the cell and even localization of 5-LO within the nucleus of some cells. Under some situations, the budding phagosome has been found to assemble these proteins. Non-enzymatic proteins such as FLAP are now known as critical partners of this protein-machine assembly.| An unexpected pathway of leukotriene biosynthesis involves the transfer of the chemically reactive intermediate, LTA4, from the biosynthetic cell followed by conversion into LTB4 or LTC4 by other cells that do not express 5-LO. (PMID 17623009  ). Leukotrienes are eicosanoids. The eicosanoids consist of the prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), leukotrienes (LTs) and lipoxins (LXs). The PGs and TXs are collectively identified as prostanoids. Prostaglandins were originally shown to be synthesized in the prostate gland, thromboxanes from platelets (thrombocytes) and leukotrienes from leukocytes, hence the derivation of their names. All mammalian cells except erythrocytes synthesize eicosanoids. These molecules are extremely potent, able to cause profound physiological effects at very dilute concentrations. All eicosanoids function locally at the site of synthesis, through receptor-mediated G-protein linked signaling pathways.|
HMDB0000516::Beta-D-Glucose is a primary source of energy for living organisms. It is naturally occurring and is found in fruits and other parts of plants in its free state. It is used therapeutically in fluid and nutrient replacement. A glucoside is a glycoside that is derived from glucose. Glucosides are common in plants, but rare in animals. Glucose is produced when a glucoside is hydrolysed by purely chemical means, or decomposed by fermentation or enzymes. This group contains a benzene and also an ethylene group, being derived from styrolene. Coniferin, C16H22O8, occurs in the cambium of conifer wood. Emulsin converts it into glucose and coniferyl alcohol, while oxidation gives glycovanillin, which yields with emulsin glucose and vanillin. Syringin, which occurs in the bark of Syringe vulgaris, is a methoxyconiferin. Phloridzus occurs in the root-bark of various fruit trees; it hydrolyses to glucose and phloretin, which is the phloroglucin ester of paraoxyhydratropic acid. It is related to the pentosides naringin, C21HEOi1, which hydrolyses to rhamnose and naringenin, the phioroglucin ester of para-oxycinnamic acid, and hesperidin, which hydrolyses to rhamnose and hesperetin, the phloroglucin ester of meta-oxy-para-methoxycinnamic acid or isoferulic acid, C10H10O4. Classification of the glucosides is a matter of some difficulty. One based on the chemical constitution of the non-glucose part of the molecules has been proposed that frames four groups: (I) ethylene derivatives, (2) benzene derivatives, (3) styrolene derivatives, (4) anthracene derivatives. A group may also be made to include the cyanogenetic glucosides, i.e. those containing prussic acid. Other classifications follow a botanical classification, which has several advantages; in particular, plants of allied genera contain similar compounds. In this article the chemical classification will be followed, and only the more important compounds will be discussed here.|
HMDB0003345::Alpha-D-Glucose is a primary source of energy for living organisms. It is naturally occurring and is found in fruits and other parts of plants in its free state. It is used therapeutically in fluid and nutrient replacement.|
HMDB0000569::Deoxypyridinoline (DPD) is a breakdown product of type I fibrillar collagen, it occurs mainly in Type I collagen of bone. DPD shows a high specificity for bone, and the measurement of urinary DPD is not influenced by newly collagens and dietary intake. DPD cross-links of type 1 collagen are excreted in urine either as free or peptide-bound moieties. It is the peptide-bound cross-links that decrease by the greatest amount in response to bisphosphonate therapy. DPD is one of the most extensively characterized biochemical bone markers, but the interpretation of results is hampered by biologic and other preanalytical variability. Biochemical bone markers can provide a valuable tool in the management of metabolic bone diseases. Their most recognized application in clinical practice is for monitoring treatment for osteoporosis as an adjunct to bone mineral density measurements. Other applications that have been investigated include their use as a diagnostic tool for bone diseases other than osteoporosis and as predictive markers for bone loss and the risk of bone fracture. DPD measured in urine follow a circadian or diurnal cycle with a peak in the early morning and nadir in the late afternoon to early evening. The magnitude of the diurnal change, i.e., nadir concentration divided by peak concentration, expressed as a percentage is around 70% (range, 53-75%). (PMID: 11805003  , 17229003  , 16751696  ).|
HMDB0006112::Malondialdehyde (MDA) is the dialdehyde of malonic acid and a biomarker of oxidative damage to lipids caused by smoking. Oxidized lipids are able to produce MDA as a decomposition product. The mechanism is thought to involve formation of prostaglandin-like endoperoxides from polyunsaturated fatty acids with two or more double bonds. An alternative mechanism is based on successive hydroperoxide formation and β-cleavage of polyunsaturated fatty acids. MDA is then directly formed by β-scission of a 3-hydroperoxyaldehyde or by reaction between acrolein and hydroxyl radicals. While oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids is the major source of MDA in vivo, other minor sources exists such as byproducts of free radical generation by ionizing radiation and of the biosynthesis of prostaglandins. Aldehydes are generally reactive species capable of forming adducts and complexes in biological systems and MDA is no exception although the main species at physiological pH is the enolate ion which is of relative low reactivity.| Consistent evidence is available for the reaction between MDA (Malondialdehyde) and cellular macromolecules such as proteins, RNA and DNA. MDA reacts with DNA to form adducts to deoxyguanosine and deoxyadenosine which may be mutagenic and these can be quantified in several human tissues. Oxidative stress is an imbalance between oxidants and antioxidants on a cellular or individual level. Oxidative damage is one result of such an imbalance and includes oxidative modification of cellular macromolecules, induction of cell death by apoptosis or necrosis, as well as structural tissue damage. Chemically speaking, oxidants are compounds capable of oxidizing target molecules. This can take place in three ways: abstraction of hydrogen, abstraction of electrons or addition of oxygen. All cells living under aerobic conditions are continuously exposed to a large numbers of oxidants derived from various endogenous and exogenous sources. The endogenous sources of oxidants are several and include the respiratory chain in the mitochondria, immune reactions, enzymes such as xanthine oxidase and nitric oxide synthase and transition metal mediated oxidation. Various exogenous sources of ROS also contribute directly or indirectly to the total oxidant load. These include effects of ionizing and non-ionizing radiation, air pollution and natural toxic gases such as ozone, and chemicals and toxins including oxidizing disinfectants. A poor diet containing inadequate amounts of nutrients may also indirectly result in oxidative stress by impairing cellular defense mechanisms. The cellular macromolecules, in particular lipids, proteins and DNA, are natural targets of oxidation. Oxidants are capable of initiating lipid oxidation by abstraction of an allylic proton from a polyunsaturated fatty acid. This process, by multiple stages leading to the formation of lipid hydroperoxides, is a known contributor to the development of atherosclerosis. (PMID: 17336279  ).|
HMDB0000909::trans-4-hydroxycyclohexylacetic acid is a tyrosine metabolite that has been found in the urine of a patient with a defect of 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase (EC 1.13.11.27), an inborn error of metabolism. (PMID: 701419  , 719903  ).|
HMDB0002354::Hawkinsin is a sulfur amino acid identified as (2-L-cystein-S-yl-1,4-dihydroxycyclohex-5-en-1-yl)acetic acid. It is a reactive byproduct of abnormal tyrosine metabolism. Normally, the breakdown of the amino acid tyrosine involves the conversion of 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate to homogentisate by 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase. Complete deficiency of this enzyme leads to an inborn error of metabolism called tyrosinemia III. In rare cases, however, the enzyme is still able to produce the reactive intermediate 1,2-epoxyphenyl acetic acid but is unable to convert this intermediate to homogentisate (PMID: 11073718  ). The intermediate then spontaneously reacts with glutathione to form hawkinsin. Chronically high levels of hawkinsin are associated with hawkinsinuria (characterized by the inability to break down the amino acid tyrosine).| Patients with hawkinsinuria excrete hawkinsin in their urine throughout their life. The features of this condition usually appear around the time infants are weaned off breast milk and begin to use formula. The signs and symptoms may include the following: failure to gain weight and grow at the expected rate (failure to thrive), abnormally high acid levels in the blood (acidosis), and fine or sparse hair. Hawkinsin is an acidogen and a metabotoxin. An acidogen is an acidic compound that induces acidosis, which has multiple adverse effects on many organ systems. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Hawkinsin is an organic acid. Abnormally high levels of organic acids in the blood (organic acidemia), urine (organic aciduria), the brain, and other tissues lead to general metabolic acidosis. Acidosis typically occurs when arterial pH falls below 7.35. In infants with acidosis, the initial symptoms include poor feeding, vomiting, loss of appetite, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and lack of energy (lethargy). These can progress to heart, liver, and kidney abnormalities, seizures, coma, and possibly death. These are also the characteristic symptoms of untreated hawkinsinuria. Many affected children with organic acidemias experience intellectual disability or delayed development. In adults, acidosis or acidemia is characterized by headaches, confusion, feeling tired, tremors, sleepiness, and seizures.|
HMDB0004879::Trihexosylceramide is a glycosphingolipid which contains a trisaccharide (galactose-galactose-glucose) moiety bound in glycosidic linkage to the hydroxyl group of ceramide as the polar head group. It accumulates in tissue due to a defect in ceramide trihexosidase and is the cause of angiokeratoma corporis diffusum (Fabry disease). Although normal human colonic epithelial cells lack the glycosphingolipid globotriaosylceramide (Gb(3)), this molecule is highly expressed in metastatic colon cancer (PubMed ID 16365318 ).|
HMDB0004881::Trihexosylceramide is a glycosphingolipid which contains a trisaccharide (galactose-galactose-glucose) moiety bound in glycosidic linkage to the hydroxyl group of ceramide as the polar head group. It accumulates in tissue due to a defect in ceramide trihexosidase and is the cause of angiokeratoma corporis diffusum (Fabry disease). Although normal human colonic epithelial cells lack the glycosphingolipid globotriaosylceramide (Gb(3)), this molecule is highly expressed in metastatic colon cancer (PubMed ID 16365318 ).|
HMDB0000277::Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), also known as sphing-4-enine-1-phosphate, is classified as a member of the phosphosphingolipids. Phosphosphingolipids are sphingolipids with a structure based on a sphingoid base that is attached to a phosphate head group. They differ from phosphonospingolipids which have a phosphonate head group. S1P is a compound with potent bioactive actions in sphingolipid metabolism, the calcium signalling pathway, and neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction. Generated by sphingosine kinases and ceramide kinase, S1P control numerous aspects of cell physiology, including cell survival and mammalian inflammatory responses. S1P is involved in cyclooxygenase-2 induction (COX-2) and regulates the production of eicosanoids (important inflammatory mediators). S1P functions mainly via G-protein-coupled receptors and probably also has intracellular targets (PMID: 16219683   ). S1P is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and acidic.|
HMDB0011511::LysoPE(20:0/0:0) is a lysophosphatidylethanolamine or a lysophospholipid. The term 'lysophospholipid' (LPL) refers to any phospholipid that is missing one of its two O-acyl chains. Thus, LPLs have a free alcohol in either the sn-1 or sn-2 position. The prefix 'lyso-' comes from the fact that lysophospholipids were originally found to be hemolytic however it is now used to refer generally to phospholipids missing an acyl chain. LPLs are usually the result of phospholipase A-type enzymatic activity on regular phospholipids such as phosphatidylcholine or phosphatidic acid, although they can also be generated by the acylation of glycerophospholipids or the phosphorylation of monoacylglycerols. Some LPLs serve important signaling functions such as lysophosphatidic acid. Lysophosphatidylethanolamines (LPEs) can function as plant growth regulators with several diverse uses. (LPEs) are approved for outdoor agricultural use to accelerate ripening and improve the quality of fresh produce. They are also approved for indoor use to preserve stored crops and commercial cut flowers. As a breakdown product of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), LPE is present in cells of all organisms.|
HMDB0002497::Glycochenodeoxycholate-3-sulfate is a bile salt formed in the liver from chenodeoxycholate and glycine, usually as the sodium salt. It acts as a detergent to solubilize fats for absorption and is itself absorbed. It is a cholagogue and choleretic.|
HMDB0001452::Thromboxane A2 is an unstable intermediate between the prostaglandin endoperoxides and thromboxane B2. The compound has a bicyclic oxaneoxetane structure. It is a potent inducer of platelet aggregation and causes vasoconstriction. It is the principal component of rabbit aorta contracting substance (RCS).Thromboxanes are eicosanoids. The eicosanoids consist of the prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), leukotrienes (LTs) and lipoxins (LXs). The PGs and TXs are collectively identified as prostanoids. Prostaglandins were originally shown to be synthesized in the prostate gland, thromboxanes from platelets (thrombocytes) and leukotrienes from leukocytes, hence the derivation of their names. All mammalian cells except erythrocytes synthesize eicosanoids. These molecules are extremely potent, able to cause profound physiological effects at very dilute concentrations. All eicosanoids function locally at the site of synthesis, through receptor-mediated G-protein linked signaling pathways.|
HMDB0012325::Arabinofuranose refers to the furanose form of arabinose, which is an optical isomer of arabinose. For biosynthetic reasons, most saccharides are almost always more abundant in nature as the "D" form, or structurally analogous to D-(+)-glyceraldehyde. However, L-arabinose is in fact more common than D-arabinose in nature and is found in nature as a component of biopolymers such as hemicellulose and pectin.|
HMDB0002089::N tau-ribosylhistidine (His-R) is a histidine derivative found in the urine of histidinemic patients (histidinemia is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder characterized by increased levels of histidine in blood, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid). The enzymes responsible for the formation of His-R are NAD (P) + nucleosidase [EC 3.2.2.5], nucleotide pyrophosphatase [EC 3.5.1.9] and 5'-nucleotidase [EC 3.1.3.5] (PMID: 2992472  ).|
HMDB0000575::Homocystine is the double-bonded form of homocysteine, but it occurs only transiently before being converted to the harmless cystathionine via a vitamin B6-dependent enzyme. Homocystine and homocysteine-cysteine mixed disulfide account for >98% of total homocysteine in plasma from healthy individuals (PMID 11592966  ). Oxidation of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) is thought to be a major factor in the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis. Elevated plasma homocysteine is an accepted risk factor for atherosclerosis, and may act through LDL oxidation, although this is controversial. However, the major thiol in plasma is cysteine, which is present at concentrations approximately 10 times greater than homocysteine; therefore homocystine in plasma is insignificant, and consequently homocystine is unlikely to influence LDL oxidation in vivo (PMID 14732479  ). Increasing evidence supports a role for an elevation of homocysteine in schizophrenia. It has been demonstrated that neural tube defects are related to a genetic defect in homocysteine metabolism. Sufficient intake of folic acid is believed to reduce this risk by enhancing methylation of homocysteine and its conversion to methionine, thereby compensating for this genetic defect (Homocystinuria). Plasma homocysteine levels are elevated when folate levels are in the lower half of the normal range (PMID 16143442   ). Moreover, DL-homocystine is found to be associated with methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase deficiency and methylmalonic acidemia, which are also inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0002886::6-keto-Prostaglandin F1a is the physiologically active and stable metabolite of prostacyclin. (A prostaglandin found in nearly all mammalian tissue that is a powerful vasodilator and inhibits platelet aggregation; it is biosynthesized enzymatically from prostaglandin endoperoxides in human vascular tissue; the sodium salt has been also used to treat primary pulmonary hypertension (Hypertension, Pulmonary). A delayed and prolonged increase in 6-keto-PGF1 alpha is reported in animals with septic shock, i.e., those with fecal peritonitis or cecal ligation. 6-keto-Prostaglandin F1a plasma levels has been found increased in patients with epidemic hemorrhagic fever, in patients with acute obstructive suppurative cholangitis, in patients with gynecologic cancer and has significant correlation with the level of high density lipoprotein cholesterol in plasma. (PMID 1976492  , 2298410  , 2379443  , 2111556  )Prostaglandins are eicosanoids. The eicosanoids consist of the prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), leukotrienes (LTs) and lipoxins (LXs). The PGs and TXs are collectively identified as prostanoids. Prostaglandins were originally shown to be synthesized in the prostate gland, thromboxanes from platelets (thrombocytes) and leukotrienes from leukocytes, hence the derivation of their names. All mammalian cells except erythrocytes synthesize eicosanoids. These molecules are extremely potent, able to cause profound physiological effects at very dilute concentrations. All eicosanoids function locally at the site of synthesis, through receptor-mediated G-protein linked signaling pathways.|
HMDB0003252::Thromboxanes. A stable, physiologically active compound formed in vivo from the prostaglandin endoperoxides. It is important in the platelet-release reaction (release of ADP and serotonin). -- Pubchem. Thromboxanes are eicosanoids. The eicosanoids consist of the prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), leukotrienes (LTs) and lipoxins (LXs). The PGs and TXs are collectively identified as prostanoids. Prostaglandins were originally shown to be synthesized in the prostate gland, thromboxanes from platelets (thrombocytes) and leukotrienes from leukocytes, hence the derivation of their names. All mammalian cells except erythrocytes synthesize eicosanoids. These molecules are extremely potent, able to cause profound physiological effects at very dilute concentrations. All eicosanoids function locally at the site of synthesis, through receptor-mediated G-protein linked signaling pathways.|
HMDB0000670::L-homoarginine, also known as n6-(aminoiminomethyl)-L-lysine or n6-amidino-L-lysine, is a member of the class of compounds known as L-alpha-amino acids. L-alpha-amino acids are alpha amino acids which have the L-configuration of the alpha-carbon atom. L-homoarginine is slightly soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). L-homoarginine can be found primarily in blood, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and urine, as well as in human intestine and testes tissues. Within the cell, L-homoarginine is primarily located in the cytoplasm (predicted from logP). Moreover, L-homoarginine is found to be associated with cirrhosis and and the genetic disorder, hyperargininemia. Homoarginine is a guanidino compounds of guanidinoethanesulfonic acid It is an organ-specific uncompetitive inhibitor of human liver and bone alkaline phosphohydrolase (PMID 5063678  ).|
HMDB0001438::9,10-Secoergosta-5,7,10(19),22-tetraene-3,25-diol. Biologically active metabolite of vitamin D2 which is more active in curing rickets than its parent. The compound is believed to attach to the same receptor as vitamin D2 and 25-hydroxyvitamin D3.|
HMDB0001036::Angiotensin III (AngIII) is one of the N-terminal angiotensin degradation products of angiotensin II. AngIII shares some of its properties with Ang II, including chemotaxis and production of growth factors and chemokines. AngIII generated within the brain acts within neural circuits of the central nervous system to regulate body fluid balance. The stimulation of vasopressin release by AngIII is thought to be one of the mechanisms by which AngIII controls volume homeostasis under conditions of hypovolemia, by reducing renal water loss and increasing blood pressure. Brain aminopeptidase A, the enzyme forming central AngIII, could constitute a putative central therapeutic target for the treatment of hypertension. (PMID: 17210474  , 11751722  , 11295571  ).|
HMDB0001035::Angiotensin II is a hormone that may act on the central nervous system to regulate renal sympathetic nerve activity, renal function, and, therefore, blood pressure. Angiotensin II is produced locally within the kidney and mediates tissue injury through a series of nonhemodynamic effects. angiotensin II is not only involved in the regulation of blood pressure, water and sodium homeostasis, and control of other neurohumoral systems, but also leads to excessive production of reactive oxygen species and to hypertrophy, proliferation, migration, and apoptosis of vascular cells. Angiotensin II is one of the main factors involved in hypertension-induced tissue damage. This peptide regulates the inflammatory process. Angiotensin II activates circulating cells, and participates in their adhesion to the activated endothelium and subsequent transmigration through the synthesis of adhesion molecules, chemokines and cytokines. Among the intracellular signals involved in angiotensin II-induced inflammation, the production of reactive oxygen species and the activation of nuclear factor-kappaB are the best known.| Classical, well-defined actions of Angiotensin II in the brain include the regulation of hormone formation and release, the control of the central and peripheral sympathoadrenal systems, and the regulation of water and sodium intake. As a consequence of changes in the hormone, sympathetic and electrolyte systems, feedback mechanisms in turn modulate the activity of the brain Angiotensin II systems. There are two Angiotensin II systems in the brain. The discovery of brain Angiotensin II receptors located in neurons inside the blood brain barrier confirmed the existence of an endogenous brain Angiotensin II system, responding to Angiotensin II generated in and/or transported into the brain. In addition, Angiotensin II receptors in circumventricular organs and in cerebrovascular endothelial cells respond to circulating Angiotensin II of peripheral origin. Thus, the brain responds to both circulating and tissue Angiotensin II, and the two systems are integrated. (PMID: 17147923  , 16672146  , 16601568  , 16481883  , 16075377  ).|
HMDB0004989::m-Tyramine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenethylamines. Phenethylamines are compounds containing a phenethylamine moiety, which consists of a phenyl group substituted at the second position by an ethan-1-amine. m-Tyramine exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). m-Tyramine has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. Within the cell, m-tyramine is primarily located in the cytoplasm.|
HMDB0004826::p-Synephrine, also known as (+/-)-synephrine or oxedrine, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as 1-hydroxy-2-unsubstituted benzenoids. These are phenols that are unsubstituted at the 2-position. p-Synephrine is soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). p-Synephrine has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. |
HMDB0004825::p-Octopamine, also known as norsympathol or analet, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as 1-hydroxy-2-unsubstituted benzenoids. These are phenols that are unsubstituted at the 2-position. p-Octopamine is soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). p-Octopamine has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. p-Octopamine can be converted into (R)-N-trans-feruloyloctopamine. Outside of the human body, p-octopamine can be found in a number of food items such as fruits, root vegetables, mollusks, and herbs and spices. This makes p-octopamine a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0005998::20-Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (20-HETE) is a metabolite of arachidonic acid. Cytochrome P450 enzymes of the 4A and 4F families catalyze the omega-hydroxylation of arachidonic acid and produce 20-HETE. 20-HETE is a potent constrictor of renal, cerebral, and mesenteric arteries. The vasoconstrictor response to 20-HETE is associated with activation of protein kinase, Rho kinase, and the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway C. 20-HETE also increases intracellular Ca2+ by causing the depolarization of vascular smooth muscle membrane secondary to blocking the large-conductance Ca2+-activated K+-channels and by a direct effect on L-type Ca channels. Elevations in the production of 20-HETE mediate the myogenic response of skeletal, renal, and cerebral arteries to elevations in transmural pressure. There is an important interaction between nitric oxide (NO) and the formation of 20-HETE production. NO inhibits the formation of 20-HETE formation in renal and cerebral arteries. A fall in levels of 20-HETE contributes to the cyclic GMP-independent dilator effect of NO to activate the large-conductance Ca2+-activated K+-channels and to dilate the cerebral arteries (PMID: 16258232  ).|
HMDB0000628::The 17-alpha isomer of testosterone, derived from pregnenolone via the delta5-steroid pathway, and via 5-androstene-3-beta,17-alpha-diol. Epitestosterone acts as an antiandrogen in various target tissues. The ratio between testosterone/epitestosterone is used to monitor anabolic drug abuse.|
HMDB0003598::Retinyl ester, also known as all-E-retinoate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as retinoids. These are oxygenated derivatives of 3,7-dimethyl-1-(2,6,6-trimethylcyclohex-1-enyl)nona-1,3,5,7-tetraene and derivatives thereof. Retinyl ester is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Retinyl ester has been found throughout most human tissues, and has also been primarily detected in blood. Within the cell, retinyl ester is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Retinyl ester participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, Retinyl ester can be converted into 11-cis-retinol; which is catalyzed by the enzyme retinoid isomerohydrolase. In addition, Retinyl ester can be biosynthesized from vitamin a and acetyl-CoA through the action of the enzyme diacylglycerol O-acyltransferase 1. In humans, retinyl ester is involved in the retinol metabolism pathway. Retinyl ester is also involved in the metabolic disorder called vitamin a deficiency.|
HMDB0031325::n-Butyl acetate is a flavouring ingredient used in apple flavours. n-Butyl acetate, also known as butyl ethanoate, is an organic compound commonly used as a solvent in the production of lacquers and other products. It is also used as a synthetic fruit flavoring in foods such as candy, ice cream, cheeses, and baked goods. Butyl acetate is found in many types of fruit, where along with other chemicals it imparts characteristic flavors. Apples, especially of the Red Delicious variety, are flavored in part by this chemical. It is a colourless flammable liquid with a sweet smell of banana|
HMDB0002186::Hypogeic acid is a fatty acids found in human milk Approximately 50% of the dietary calories in human milk are supplied to new-borns as fat. More than 98% of this milk fat is in the form of triglycerides, which contain fatty acid glycerol esters. Fatty acid composition in human milk changes in colostrum, transitional milk and mature milk. Knowledge of fatty acid composition of human milk is of importance for the manufacture of infant formulas, determination of the influence of diet in fatty acid composition of human milk and changes in composition with lactation. (CAN 136:246580, AN 2002:67899).|
HMDB0002226::Adrenic acid, also known as 7,10,13,16-docosatetraenoic acid or adrenate, is a member of the class of compounds known as very long-chain fatty acids. Very long-chain fatty acids are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains at least 22 carbon atoms. Adrenic acid is practically insoluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Adrenic acid can be found in blood and in human myelin tissue. Within the cell, adrenic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm, in the membrane (predicted from logP), and in the peroxisome. It can also be found in the extracellular space. In humans, adrenic acid is involved in alpha-linolenic acid and linoleic acid metabolism. Docosatetraenoic acid designates any straight chain 22:4 fatty acid. In particular, all-cis-7,10,13,16-docosatetraenoic acid is an ω-6 fatty acid with the trivial name adrenic acid (AdA). This is a naturally occurring polyunsaturated fatty acid formed through a 2-carbon chain elongation of arachidonic acid. It is one of the most abundant fatty acids in the early human brain. This unsaturated fatty acid is also metabolized by cells into biologically active products, such as dihomoprostaglandins and dihomo-epoxyeicosatrienoic acids (dihomo-EETs) (Wikipedia). Adrenic acid, which is a prostacyclin inhibitor, appears to be a potential prothrombotic agent (PMID: 1642692  ).|
HMDB0002011::4-hydroxyisovaleric acid is a metabolite of isovaleric acid that has been reported to be found in the urine of patients with isovaleric acidemia. It seems to be an intermediate product in the formation of methylsuccinic acid from isovaleric acid by omega-. oxidation.|
HMDB0000032::7-Dehydrocholesterol is a zoosterol (a sterol produced by animals rather than plants). It is a provitamin-D. The presence of this compound in skin enables humans to manufacture vitamin D3 from ultraviolet rays via an intermediate isomer provitamin D3. It is also found in breast milk.|
HMDB0003080::Leukotriene D4 (LTD4) is a cysteinyl leukotriene. Cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLTs) are a family of potent inflammatory mediators that appear to contribute to the pathophysiologic features of allergic rhinitis. LTD4 is a pro-inflammatory mediator known to mediate its effects through specific cell-surface receptors belonging to the G-protein-coupled receptor family, namely the high-affinity CysLT1 (cysteinyl leukotriene 1) receptor. LTD4 is present at high levels in many inflammatory conditions, and areas of chronic inflammation have an increased risk for subsequent cancer development. LTD4 is associated with the pathogenesis of several inflammatory disorders, such as asthma and inflammatory bowel disease. Exposure to LTD4 increases survival and proliferation in intestinal epithelial cells. CysLT1 regulator is up-regulated in colon cancer tissue and LTD4 signalling facilitates the survival of cancer cells. LTD4 could reduce apoptosis in non-transformed epithelial cells. LTD4 causes up-regulation of beta-catenin through the CysLT1 receptor, PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase), and GSK-3β (glycogen synthase kinase 3β). LTD4 induces beta-catenin translocation to the nucleus and activation of TCF/LEF family of transcription factors. LTD4 causes accumulation of free beta-catenin in non-transformed intestinal epithelial cells through the CysLT1 receptor, and this accumulation is dependent upon the activation of PI3K as well as GSK-3β inactivation (PMID: 16042577  , 12607939  ). Leukotrienes are eicosanoids. The eicosanoids consist of the prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), leukotrienes (LTs), and lipoxins (LXs). The PGs and TXs are collectively identified as prostanoids. Prostaglandins were originally shown to be synthesized in the prostate gland, thromboxanes from platelets (thrombocytes), and leukotrienes from leukocytes, hence the derivation of their names. All mammalian cells except erythrocytes synthesize eicosanoids. These molecules are extremely potent and are able to cause profound physiological effects at very dilute concentrations. All eicosanoids function locally at the site of synthesis through receptor-mediated G-protein linked signaling pathways.|
HMDB0000268::Tetrahydrocorticosterone is one of the major urinary metabolites from corticosterone. Premenopausal patients with early breast cancer excrete subnormal amounts of tetrahydrocorticosterone as compared with the normal subjects of corresponding ages. (PMID 1133844  ).|
HMDB0000879::The neurosteroid allotetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone (THDOC) is an allosteric modulator of the GABA(A) receptor. Although the role of THDOC within the brain is undefined, recent studies indicate that stress induces THDOC to levels that can activate GABA(A) receptors. These results might have significant implications for human stress-sensitive conditions such as epilepsy, post-traumatic stress disorder and depression. (PMID 12628349  ).|
HMDB0000521::5Z-Tetradecenoic acid is an intermediate of unsaturated fatty acid oxidation that is incorporated in triglycerides, but not in phospholipids, in tissues from patients with mitochondrial beta-oxidation defects, particularly in very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (VLCADD1/VLCADD2) (PMID 2051892  ), a genetic disorder. 5Z-Tetradecenoic acid is also found to be associated with long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase, and multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD), which are also inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0006270::Linoelaidic acid is an isomer of linoleic acid, or conjugated linoleic acid (CLA), a derivative of a fatty acid linoleic acid. Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) isomers, a group of positional and geometric isomers of linoleic acid [18:2(n-6)], have been studied extensively due to their ability to modulate cancer, atherosclerosis, obesity, immune function and diabetes in a variety of experimental models. CLA's ability to modulate human obesity remains controversial because data from clinical trials using mixed isomers are conflicting. (PMID 10759137  ). Trans fatty acids are characteristically produced during industrial hydrogenation of plant oils.|
HMDB0003759::5a-Pregnane-3,20-dione is a biologically active 5-alpha-reduced metabolite of plasma progesterone. It is the immediate precursor of 5-alpha-pregnan-3-alpha-ol-20-one (allopregnanolone), a neuroactive steroid that binds with GABA(A) receptor.|
HMDB0001449::Allopregnanolone is a neuroactive metabolite of progesterone and a barbiturate-like modulator of central gamma-aminobutyric acid receptors that modify a range of behaviors, including the stress response. is a steroid created in the body when progesterone, the female sex hormone, is metabolized. Typically, THP (allopregnanolone) is released in the brain in response to stress, and quiets the neural system within 30 minutes of escalation. This steroid hormone has recently been found to be responsible for the extreme mood swings found in teenagers. In adults and pre-pubescent chlidren THP normally helps soothe the activity of brain cells by binding to GABA receptors that inhibit accelerating electrical activity. However, in pubescent teenagers THP actually becomes a GABA receptor antagonist. GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) is the primary inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain with most sedatives (tranquilizers, anesthetics and alcohol) acting on the GABA receptor.|
HMDB0004370::N-Methyltryptamine (NMT), or monomethyltryptamine, is a tryptamine alkaloid that has been found in the bark, shoots and leaves of numerous plants. (wikipedia). N-Methyltryptamine was detected in urine from all autistic patients with mental retardation and epilepsy and many autistic patients (32/47) with mental retardation (PubMed ID 8747157 ).|
HMDB0002004::5-Methoxydimethyltryptamine, like all Methoxydimethyltryptamines is a compound that contain the biogenic monoamine tryptamine and is substituted with one methoxy group and two methyl groups. Members of this group include several potent serotonergic hallucinogens found in several unrelated plants, skins of certain toads, and in mammalian brains. They are possibly involved in the etiology of schizophrenia. (PubChem). They are formed as metabolites of serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) or tryptamine by the enzyme indolethylamine N-methyltransferase (INMT). The physiological significance of the N-methylating pathway of indoleamine metabolism, and of the methylated end products, is unknown. Because of the known psychotropic properties of the dimethylated amines, their possible involvement in the chemical pathogenesis of mental disorders has received wide interest. The hallucinogenic actions of the methylated indoleamines, like those of LSD, are believed to be mediated through the 5HT2 receptor. (PMID 11763413  ).|
HMDB0001091::3-Hydroxyquinine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as cinchona alkaloids. These are alkaloids structurally characterized by the presence of the cinchonan skeleton, which consists of a quinoline linked to an azabicyclo[2.2.2]octane moiety. 3-Hydroxyquinine is slightly soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 3-Hydroxyquinine has been primarily detected in blood. |
HMDB0002095::Malonylcarnitine is a metabolite that accumulates with specific disruption of fatty-acid oxidation caused by impaired entry of long-chain acylcarnitine esters into the mitochondria and failure of the mitochondrial respiratory chain at complex 11 and malonyl-CoA decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.9) deficiency (OMIM 248360  ). Malonylcarnitine has also been found to accumulate in some newborns with medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (EC 1.3.99.3) deficiency (OMIM 201450  ). (PMID 11558490  , 15303003  , 12651823  ).|
HMDB0031306::Description: 3-Hydroxy-4,5-dimethyl-2(5H)-furanone or sotolone is key flavoring compound found in raw cane sugar, aged sake, coffee, fenugreek, lovage and wines. Sotolon (also known as sotolone) is a lactone and an extremely powerful aroma compound, with the typical smell of fenugreek or curry at high concentrations and maple syrup, caramel, or burnt sugar at lower concentrations. In 1999 it was shown that sotolone is the cause of the odor found in patients with maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) - PMID 10234605  .  This compound was found in the urine of 7 MSUD patients but was undetectable in normal individuals. 3-Hydroxy-4,5-dimethyl-2(5H)-furanone belongs to the family of Butenolides. These are dihydrofurans with a carbonyl group at the C2 carbon atom.|
HMDB0002820::Methylimidazoleacetic acid is the main metabolite of histamine. This end product of histamine catabolism is formed by N-methylation in the imidazole ring to methylhistamine by histamine methyltransferase (EC 2.1.1.8) and a subsequent oxidative deamination in the side chain by type B monoamine oxidase (EC 1.4.3.4). Based on studies, it is known that as much as 70 to 80 percent of the histamine metabolized in the body is excreted in the urine as methylimidazoleacetic acid. Thus, urinary methylimidazoleacetic acid being the major and specific histamine metabolite is a clear marker of any changes in histamine metabolism in the body. The urinary excretion of methylimidazoleacetic acid is considered a reliable indicator of histamine turnover rate in the body. The excretion of methylimidazoleacetic acid is higher in men than in women. However, this gender difference is abolished when corrected for creatinine excretion. A possible explanation is that basal histamine turnover is related to body size. There is no significant difference in methylimidazoleacetic acid excretion between smokers and non-smokers when analyzing absolute values (mg/24 h). When using methylimidazoleacetic acid values corrected for creatinine excretion female smokers have significantly higher methylimidazoleacetic acid excretion compared to nonsmokers (PMID: 11411609  , 7130180  , 10350179  , 10202992  ).|
HMDB0000603::cis-4-Decenedioic acid is a member of the class of compounds known as medium-chain fatty acids. Medium-chain fatty acids are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 4 and 12 carbon atoms. Thus, cis-4-decenedioic acid is considered to be a fatty acid lipid molecule. Cis-4-decenedioic acid is slightly soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Cis-4-decenedioic acid can be found primarily in urine. Within the cell, cis-4-decenedioic acid is primarily located in the membrane. It can also be found in the extracellular space. Moreover, cis-4-decenedioic acid is an unsaturated dicarboxylic acid. Its level increases in patients with medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MCADD), which is a genetic disorder of fatty acid oxidation.|
HMDB0000341::2-Octenedioic acid, also known as 2-octenedioate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as medium-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 4 and 12 carbon atoms. 2-Octenedioic acid is slightly soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 2-Octenedioic acid has been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, 2-octenedioic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and adiposome.|
HMDB0000860::Phenylpropionylglycine is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction:acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycineThe detection of phenylpropionylglycine in urine after an oral load of phenylpropionic acid can be used to diagnose deficiency of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, a frequent and treatable metabolic defect. (PMID 9234867  ).|
HMDB0000953::Suberylglycine is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction: acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycineSuberylglycine is a dicarboxylic acid. It is formed by glycine-N-acylase catalyzed conjugation (PMID 947635  ). It can be used for the diagnosis of hereditary medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (PMID 2775902  ). Suberylglycine is found to be associated with propionic acidemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000350::3-Hydroxysebacic acid is a normal urinary 3-hydroxydicarboxylic acid metabolite and can be elevated in patients with peroxisomal disorders such as Zellweger syndrome. Marked elevation of urinary 3- Hydroxysebacic acid has also been described in a malnourished infant with glycogen storage disease, mimicking long-chain L-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (OMIM 300438  ), a defect in the beta-oxidation of fatty acids characterized by massive excretion of 3-hydroxydicarboxylic acids in the urine and accumulation of 3-hydroxy fatty acids in serum (PMID 12860034  , 14708889  , 8295400  ). 3-Hydroxysebacic acid is also found to be associated with medium-chain Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000832::Capryloylglycine is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction:. acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycine. A complex of amino acid protein that helps kill microbes, and protects skin from water loss.|
HMDB0004982::4-Octenedioic acid have been found slightly elevated in the urine of persons with abnormal fatty acid metabolism (PMID 2094705  ). cis-4-Octenedioic acid is found to be associated with medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0013227::cis-5-Decenedioic acid is a mono-unsaturated dicarboxylic acid. The dicarboxylic acid can be grouped into two metabolic series: the cis-4 series as well as the cis-3 and cis-5 series. The metabolic precursor of cis-5 unsaturated dicarboxylic acid is oleic acid (PMID: 2380628  ). cis-5-Decenedioic acid is found to be associated with medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0013311::(e)-Hex-2-enedioic acid, also known as trans-2,3-dehydroadipate or trans-2-hexenedioate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as medium-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 4 and 12 carbon atoms (e)-Hex-2-enedioic acid is slightly soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa) (e)-Hex-2-enedioic acid has been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, (e)-hex-2-enedioic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and adiposome.|
HMDB0013312::trans-3-Octenedioic acid is a mono-unsaturated dicarboxylic acid and isomer of octenedioic acids. Octenedioic acids can be derived from the oxidation of oleic and linoleic acids and are a urinary metabolites occurring in patients with dicarboxylic aciduria.(PMID: 2271537  ).|
HMDB0003192::5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide is an imidazole derivative which is a metabolite of the antineoplastic agents BIC and DIC. By itself, or as the ribonucleotide, it is used as a condensation agent in the preparation of nucleosides and nucleotides. Compounded with orotic acid, it is used to treat liver diseases. -- Pubchem.|
HMDB0000318::3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol (DOPEG) is a normal norepinephrine metabolite present in CSF, plasma and urine in humans (PMID 6875564  ). In healthy individuals there is a tendency for free DOPEG to increase and for conjugated DOPEG to decrease with age; plasmatic DOPEG levels are significantly lower in depressed patients as compared to healthy controls (PMID 6671452  ). 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol is found to be associated with Menkes syndrome, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0029222::Urolithin a-3-O-glucuronide belongs to the class of organic compounds known as phenolic glycosides. These are organic compounds containing a phenolic structure attached to a glycosyl moiety. Some examples of phenolic structures include lignans, and flavonoids. Among the sugar units found in natural glycosides are D-glucose, L-Fructose, and L rhamnose. Urolithin a-3-O-glucuronide is slightly soluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Urolithin a-3-O-glucuronide has been found in human liver and kidney tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. |
HMDB0060022::Urolithin A-8-O-glucuronide is a conjugate of Urolithin  A and glucuronide. A glucuronide, also known as glucuronoside, is any substance produced by linking glucuronic acid to another substance via a glycosidic bond. The glucuronides belong to the glycosides. Glucuronidation, the conversion of chemical compounds to glucuronides, is a method that animals use to assist in the excretion of toxic substances, drugs or other substances that cannot be used as an energy source. Glucuronic acid is attached via a glycosidic bond to the substance, and the resulting glucuronide, which has a much higher water solubility than the original substance, is eventually excreted by the kidneys. Enzymes that cleave the glycosidic bond of a glucuronide are called glucuronidases. (Wikipedia)|
HMDB0060834::N-Acetylserotonin sulfate is a metabolite of melatonin. Melatonin Listen/<U+02CC>m<U+025B>l<U+0259><U+02C8>to<U+028A>n<U+026A>n/, also known chemically as N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine, is a naturally occurring compound found in animals, plants, and microbes. In animals, circulating levels of the hormone melatonin vary in a daily cycle, thereby allowing the entrainment of the circadian rhythms of several biological functions. (Wikipedia)|
HMDB0000024::3-O-Sulfogalactosylceramide is an acidic, sulfated glycosphingolipid, often known as sulfatide. This lipid occurs in membranes of various cell types, but is found in particularly high concentrations in myelin where it constitutes 3-4% of total membrane lipids. This lipid is synthesized primarily in the oligodendrocytes in the central nervous system. Accumulation of this lipid in the lysosomes is a characteristic of metachromatic leukodystrophy, a lysosomal storage disease caused by the deficiency of arylsulfatase A. Alterations in sulfatide metabolism, trafficking, and homeostasis are present in the earliest clinically recognizable stages of Alzheimer's disease. Cerebrosides are glycosphingolipids. There are four types of glycosphingolipids, the cerebrosides, sulfatides, globosides and gangliosides. Cerebrosides have a single sugar group linked to ceramide. The most common are galactocerebrosides (containing galactose), the least common are glucocerebrosides (containing glucose). Galactocerebrosides are found predominantly in neuronal cell membranes. In contrast glucocerebrosides are not normally found in membranes. Instead, they are typically intermediates in the synthesis or degradation of more complex glycosphingolipids. Galactocerebrosides are synthesized from ceramide and UDP-galactose. Excess lysosomal accumulation of glucocerebrosides is found in Gaucher disease. Sulfatides are glycosphingolipids. There are four types of glycosphingolipids, the cerebrosides, sulfatides, globosides and gangliosides. Sulfatides are the sulfuric acid esters of galactocerebrosides. They are synthesized from galactocerebrosides and activated sulfate, 3'-phosphoadenosine 5'-phosphosulfate (PAPS).|
HMDB0000227::Mevalonic acid is a key organic compound in biochemistry. It is a precursor in the biosynthetic pathway, known as the HMG-CoA reductase pathway, that produces terpenes and steroids. Mevalonate is produced by NADPH from 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA via reduction. This reaction occurs in the cytosol. It is the committed step in cholesterol synthesis, -- Wikipedia The production of mevalonic acid (MVA) by the enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase, is the rate-limiting step in the biosynthesis of cholesterol. (Jemal et. al, Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry, 2003, 17:1715) Plasma concentrations and urinary excretion of MVA are decreased by HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor drugs such as pravastatin, simvastatin and atorvastatin. Naoumova RP, Marais AD, Mountney J, Firth JC, Rendell NB, Taylor GW, Thompson GR. Atherosclerosis 1996; 119: 203.|
HMDB0000240::Endogenous sulfite is generated as a consequence of the body's normal processing of sulfur-containing amino acids. Sulfites occur as a consequence of fermentation and also occur naturally in a number of foods and beverages. As food additives, sulfiting agents were first used in 1664 and have been approved in the United States since the 1800s. Sulfite is an allergen, a neurotoxin, and a metabotoxin.  An allergen is a compound that causes allergic reactions such as wheezing, rash, or rhinitis. A neurotoxin is a substance that causes damage to nerves or brain tissues. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. As an allergen, sulfite is known to induce asthmatic reactions. Sulfite sensitivity occurs most often in asthmatic adults (predominantly women), but it is also occasionally reported in preschool children. Adverse reactions to sulfites in nonasthmatics are extremely rare. Asthmatics who are steroid-dependent or who have a higher degree of airway hyperreactivity may be at greater risk of experiencing a reaction to sulfite-containing foods.| Sulfite sensitivity reactions vary widely, ranging from no reaction to severe. The majority of reactions are mild. These manifestations may include dermatologic, respiratory, or gastrointestinal signs and symptoms. The precise mechanisms of the sensitivity responses have not been completely elucidated: inhalation of sulfur dioxide (SO2) generated in the stomach following ingestion of sulfite-containing foods or beverages, a deficiency in a mitochondrial enzyme, and an IgE-mediated immune response have all been implicated. Exogenously supplied sulfite is detoxified by the enzyme sulfite oxidase. Sulfite oxidase (EC 1.8.3.1) is 1 of 3 enzymes in humans that require molybdenum as a cofactor. Under certain circumstances, chronically high levels of sulfite can lead to serious neurotoxicity. Sulfite oxidase deficiency (also called molybdenum cofactor deficiency) is a rare autosomal inherited disease that is typified by high concentrations of sulfite in the blood and urine. It is characterized by severe neurological symptoms such as untreatable seizures, attenuated growth of the brain, and mental retardation. It results from defects in the enzyme sulfite oxidase, which is responsible for the oxidation of sulfite to sulfate. This sulfite to sulfate reaction is the final step in the degradation of sulfur-containing metabolites (including the amino acids cysteine and methionine). The term "isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency" is used to define the deficiency caused by mutations in the sulfite oxidase gene. This differentiates it from another version of sulfite oxidase deficiency that is due to defects in the molybdenum cofactor biosynthetic pathway (with mutations in the MOCS1 or MOCS2 genes).| Isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency is a rare but devastating neurologic disease that usually presents in early infancy with seizures and alterations in muscle tone (PMID: 16234925  , 16140720  , 8586770  ). Sulfite oxidase deficiency (as caused by MOCS1 or MOCS2) may be treated with cPMP, a precursor of the molybdenum cofactor (PMID: 20385644  ).  The mechanism behind sulfite neurotoxicity appears to be related to its ability to bind and inhibit glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH). Inhibition of GDH leads to a decrease in alpha-ketoglutarate and a diminished flux through the tricarboxylic acid cycle. This is accompanied by a decrease in NADH through the mitochondrial electron transport chain, which leads to a decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential and in ATP synthesis. Since glutamate is a major metabolite in the brain, inhibition of GDH by sulfite appears to contribute to neural damage characteristic of sulfite oxidase deficiency in human infants (PMID: 15273247  ).|
HMDB0001165::Keratan is a sulfated mucopolysaccharide initially isolated from bovine cornea. At least two types are known. Type I, found mostly in the cornea, contains D-galactose and D-glucosamine-6-O-sulfate as the repeating unit; type II, found in skeletal tissues, contains D-galactose and D-galactosamine-6-O-sulfate as the repeating unit.|
HMDB0002012::Ubiquinone-1 is a member of the chemical class known as Polyprenylbenzoquinones. These are compounds containing a polyisoprene chain attached to a quinone at the second ring position. Ubiquione-1 has just 1 isoprene unit. Normally in humans it has 10. Ubiquinone-1 is an intermediate in the synthesis of Ubiquionone 10, which is also called Coenzyme Q (CoQ). CoQ is found in the membranes of endoplasmic reticulum, peroxisomes, lysosomes, vesicles and notably the inner membrane of the mitochondrion where it is an important part of the electron transport chain; there it passes reducing equivalents to acceptors such as Coenzyme Q : cytochrome c - oxidoreductase. CoQ is also essential in the formation of the apoptosome along with other adapter proteins. The loss of trophic factors activates pro-apoptotic enzymes, causing the breakdown of mitochondria. Because of its ability to transfer electrons and therefore act as an antioxidant, Coenzyme Q has become a valued dietary supplement. CoQ10 has been widely used for the treatment of heart disease (especially heart failure), gum diseases, and also breast cancer. The benzoquinone portion of Coenzyme Q10 is synthesized from amino acids, while the isoprene sidechain is synthesized from acetyl CoA through the mevalonate pathway. The mevalonate pathway is used for the first steps of cholesterol biosynthesis.|
HMDB0004118::Antimony metal and many of its compounds have been known since ancient times, and its toxicity has periodically been a matter of comment. Antimony (stibium) is an element and a metalloid, with atomic number 51 and atomic weight 121.75. It is in Group Va of the Periodic Table along with arsenic, bismuth, nitrogen and phosphorus. Contact with antimony occurs in a variety of ways, and as it is a common element in the surface of the earth it may accompany exposures to many different materials. Antimony has been identified in at least 114 different ores, and has even been found in meteorites. A recurrent problem in assessing its toxicity industrially is that arsenic and lead are often found with it, and other toxic materials, for example sulfur dioxide, may also be produced in the course of the process, and separation of exposures may be difficult or impossible. Contact with antimony has also occurred from is use as a medicinal substance, from natural exposures, and from domestic sources. Antimony has been a constituent not only of printing-metal but also of lead acid batteries, pigments, an opacifier under glazes and enamels (the white oxide), and in the present day it has been used widely as a flame retardant in fabrics and in brake linings of motor cars. Large scale industrial production, largely of antimony oxide, began in the early 19th century. Physiologically, this metal/element exists as an ion in the body.| The toxicology of antimony and its compounds is known from three sources: its medicinal use over centuries, studies of process workers in more recent times, and more recent still, studies of its presence in modern city environments and in domestic environments. Gross exposure to antimony compounds over long periods, usually the sulfide (SbS3) or the oxide (Sb2O3) has occurred in antimony miners and in antimony process workers. There have been relatively few of these, and few studies of possible symptoms have been made. Antimony sulfide imported from, at different times, China, South Africa, and South America was processed in the North-East of England from about 1870 to 2003. The process workers in North-East England have been studied at different times, notably by Sir Thomas Oliver in 1933, and by the Newcastle upon Tyne University Department of Occupational Medicine on later occasions. Studies which have been made of the working environment, and in particular of the risk of lung cancer in process workers, have underlined the high levels of exposure to antimony compounds and to other toxic materials. However, the working conditions in antimony processing have improved markedly over the last 30 years, and the workforce had been much reduced in numbers following automation of the process. Prior to the cessation of the industry in the UK it had become a white coat operation with relatively few people exposed to high concentrations of antimony. Antimony, which is normally present in domestic environments, has also been studied as a possible cause of cot death syndrome (SIDS) but extensive investigations have not confirmed this. The full importance of environmental antimony has still to be determined, and evidence of specific effects has not yet been presented. (PMID: 16307078  ).|
HMDB0000501::7-Ketocholesterol is a major oxidation product of cholesterol (oxysterol) found in human atherosclerotic plaque and is more atherogenic than cholesterol in some animal studies. Oxysterols (oxygenated forms of cholesterol) are present at low levels in the circulation and accumulate is plasma and tissues in some pathologies. In atherosclerotic lesions, 7-oxygenated oxysterols, predominantly 7-ketocholesterol, accumulate and have been implicated in the pathology of the disease. There is some in vivo and in vitro evidence that sterol 27-hydroxylase acts on 7-ketocholesterol to initiate its degradation to more polar, water-soluble products. Recent studies indicate an alternative mechanism, in which 7-ketocholesterol is reduced to 7 beta-hydroxycholesterol by 11 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1. 7-Ketocholesterol can inhibit cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase, the rate-limiting step in bile acid biosynthesis, as well as strongly inhibiting HMG-CoA reductase, the rate-limiting enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis. It has even been suggested that 7-ketocholesterol is formed enzymically as an endogenous regulator of cholesterol biosynthesis. However, when tested as a pharmacological cholesterol-lowering agent, inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase was rapidly overcome and the 7-ketocholesterol metabolised. In vitro, 7-ketocholesterol has wide-ranging and potent effects, most of which have the potential to contribute to atherosclerosis. For example, 7-ketocholesterol can be cytotoxic and can induce apoptosis in vascular cells. These effects, either individually or more likely, in combination, all implicate 7-ketocholesterol in the initiation and development of atherosclerosis, but further work is needed to establish whether or not its role is a direct causal one.| 7-Ketocholesterol is the second most abundant oxysterol found in human atherosclerotic plaque, after the enzymically formed 27-hydroxycholesterol (cholest-5-ene-3beta,27-diol). 7-Ketocholesterol differs from cholesterol by a ketone functional group present at the 7-position. It is produced from cholesterol via the epimeric cholesterol 7-hydroperoxides (cholest-5-ene-3beta-ol-7-hydroperoxide) which decompose to the epimeric 7-hydroxycholesterols (cholest-5-ene-3beta,7-diol) and 7-ketocholesterol. 7-Ketocholesterol is a major dietary oxysterol. It has also been widely suggested that 7-ketocholesterol present in atherosclerotic tissue may be derived from the diet. Certainly, 7-ketocholesterol is a major oxysterol found in cholesterol-rich processed foodstuffs. Dietary 7-ketocholesterol is rapidly metabolised by the liver to 7beta-hydroxycholesterol (cholest-5-ene-3beta,7beta-diol), unusual bile acids and perhaps even cholesterol itself. Its conversion to 7beta-hydroxycholesterol is well documented. (PMID: 15798369  , 10224662  ).|
HMDB0002179::Peroxynitrite is a potent oxidant synthesized by the cell during its normal metabolism. The peroxynitrite anion (ONOO-) is a reactive species produced in the reaction between the superoxide anion (O2*-) and nitric oxide (*NO). Peroxynitrite (ONOO-) is a strong oxidation and nitration agent, which damages DNA, proteins and other cellular structures. ONOO- is involved in several pathological conditions such as inflammation, arteriosclerosis, and neurodegenerative and cardiovascular disorders. ONOO- inhibits different steps of blood platelet activation and causes the depletion of platelet thiols. (PMID 15647782  ).|
HMDB0003892::1,2-dimethyl-6,7-dihydroxy-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline is an endogenous amine in parkinsonian and normal human brain. (PMID 2049084  ). Endogenous isoquinolines with and without catechol structure have been proposed to be neurotoxins specific for dopamine neurons. (PMID 9085193  ).|
HMDB0004085::Tuberculostearic acid is the characteristic fatty acid of acid-fast bacteria of the order Actinomycetales. (PMID 3329256  ). Tuberculostearic acid (TBSA) is a mycobacterial cell wall constituent that is possible to measure in plasma samples of patients with active tuberculosis. (PMID 14723350  ). Detection of tuberculostearic acid in cerebrospinal fluid by use of gas chromatography-mass spectrometry has proven to be a very rapid, sensitive, and specific test for tuberculous meningitis. (PMID 8438134  ).|
HMDB0004932::Ganglioside GD2 (d18:1/24:0) is a glycosphingolipid (ceramide and oligosaccharide)or oligoglycosylceramide with one or more sialic acids (i.e. n-acetylneuraminic acid) linked on the sugar chain. It is a component the cell plasma membrane which modulates cell signal transduction events. Gangliosides have been found to be highly important in immunology. Ganglioside GD2 carries a net-negative charge at pH 7.0 and is acidic. Gangliosides can amount to 6% of the weight of lipids from brain, but they are found at low levels in all animal tissues. The GD2 ganglioside is a cell surface component that appears on the surface of metastatic melanoma cells and is a marker for the progression of the disease.(PubMed ID 9216084)Gangliosides are glycosphingolipids. There are four types of glycosphingolipids, the cerebrosides, sulfatides, globosides and gangliosides. Gangliosides are very similar to globosides except that they also contain N-acetyl neuraminic acid (NANA) in varying amounts. The specific names for the gangliosides provide information about their structure. The letter G refers to ganglioside, and the subscripts M, D, T and Q indicate that the molecule contains mono-, di-, tri and quatra-sialic acid. The numbered subscripts 1, 2 and 3 refer to the carbohydrate sequence that is attached to the ceramide. In particular, 1 stands for GalGalNAcGalGlc-ceramide, 2 stands for GalNAcGalGlc-ceramide and 3 stands for GalGlc-ceramide. Deficiencies in lysosomal enzymes that degrade the carbohydrate portions of various gangliosides are responsible for a number of lysosomal storage diseases such as Tay-Sachs disease, Sandhoff disease, and GM1 gangliosidosis. The carbohydrate portion of the ganglioside GM1 is the site of attachment of cholera toxin, the protein secreted by Vibrio cholerae.|
HMDB0001900::Ribonolactone belongs to the class of organic compounds known as pentoses. These are monosaccharides in which the carbohydrate moiety contains five carbon atoms. Ribonolactone exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Ribonolactone has been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, ribonolactone is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Ribonolactone can be biosynthesized from D-ribonic acid. |
HMDB0061384::N-(3-acetamidopropyl)pyrrolidin-2-one is a catabolic product of spermidine and is formed from N1-acetylspermidine. It is classified as a member of the N-alkylpyrrolidines. N-alkylpyrrolidines are compounds containing a pyrrolidine moiety that is substituted at the N1-position with an alkyl group. Pyrrolidine is a five-membered saturated aliphatic heterocycle with one nitrogen atom and four carbon atoms. N-(3-acetamidopropyl)pyrrolidin-2-one is considered to be soluble (in water) and relatively neutral. (Chemosummarizer) It is excreted in the urine. The urinary level of N-(3-acetamidopropyl)pyrrolidin-2-one is increased in patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.|
HMDB0034164::, also known as dioleyl maleate or fema 2082, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbon atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or an aryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group). Thus, is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). has been primarily detected in feces. exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. can be biosynthesized from isoamylol. is a sweet, banana, and bitter tasting compound that can be found in apple and roman camomile. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0041011::beta-Cyclocitral is found in fig. beta-Cyclocitral is a constituent of saffron and many other plant materials. beta-Cyclocitral is produced by Microcystis species beta-Cyclocitral is a 50:50 mixture with 2,6,6-Trimethyl-2-cyclohexene-1-carboxaldehyde JQM42-W is used as a flavouring ingredient.|
HMDB0059843::(1E)-1-(Methylthio)prop-1-ene belongs to the class of organic compounds known as thioenol ethers. Thioenol ethers are compounds containing the enol ether functional group, with the formula R3SCR2=CR1 (1E)-1-(Methylthio)prop-1-ene has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva (1E)-1-(Methylthio)prop-1-ene exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans.|
HMDB0005806::The terpinenes are three isomeric hydrocarbons that are classified as terpenes. Gamma-terpinene is one these three isomeric hydrocarbons. It is natural and has been isolated from a variety of plant sources (Wikipedia). It is a major component of essential oils made from Citrus Fruits and has strong antioxidant activity. It has a lemon odor and widely used in food, flavours, soaps, cosmetics, pharmaceutical, tabacco, confectionery and perfume industries (http://www.gyanflavoursexport.com).|
HMDB0036101::(R)-3,7-Dimethyl-1,6-octadien-3-ol is found in coriander. (R)-3,7-Dimethyl-1,6-octadien-3-ol is a constituent of many essential oils including Melissa officinalis (lemon balm), rose, neroli and lavender. (R)-3,7-Dimethyl-1,6-octadien-3-ol is a major component of oil of field mint (Mentha arvensis)|
HMDB0036102::(R)-3,7-Dimethyl-1,6-octadien-3-ol, also known as (3S)-linalool or licareol, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as acyclic monoterpenoids. These are monoterpenes that do not contain a cycle (R)-3,7-Dimethyl-1,6-octadien-3-ol is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule (R)-3,7-Dimethyl-1,6-octadien-3-ol has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, (R)-3,7-dimethyl-1,6-octadien-3-ol is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm (R)-3,7-Dimethyl-1,6-octadien-3-ol is a sweet, floral, and lavender tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as spearmint, herbs and spices, sweet bay, and sweet marjoram. This makes (R)-3,7-dimethyl-1,6-octadien-3-ol a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0030433::Linalyl anthranilate, also known as linalyl 2-aminobenzoate or fema 2637, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as aromatic monoterpenoids. These are monoterpenoids containing at least one aromatic ring. Linalyl anthranilate is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Linalyl anthranilate has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, linalyl anthranilate is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Linalyl anthranilate has a blossom, fresh, and gardenia taste.|
HMDB0012157::3-Methyl-2-butenal is derivative of acrolein that is an alpha, beta unsaturated carbonyl metabolite. It can be formed endogenously during lipid peroxidation or after oxidative stress, and is considered to play an important role in human carcinogenesis. The endogenously formed acroleins are a constant source of DNA damage, can lead to mutation and can also induce tumors in humans. (PMID: 8319634  ). 3-methyl-2-butenal, which is an unsaturated aldehyde bearing substitution at the alkene terminus, is a poor inactivator of the enzymes protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs). The inactivation of PTPs can yield profound biological consequences arising from the disruption of cellular signaling pathways (PMID: 17655273  ).|
HMDB0041822::Acrolein (systematic name: propenal) is the simplest unsaturated aldehyde. It is a colourless liquid with a piercing, disagreeable, acrid smell. The smell of burnt fat (as when cooking oil is heated to its smoke point) is caused by glycerol in the burning fat breaking down into acrolein. It is produced industrially from propylene and mainly used as a biocide and a building block to other chemical compounds, such as the amino acid methionine. Acrolein is used as an etherification agent in the preparation of modified food starches. Acrolein is an herbicide and algicide used in water treatment. It is produced by microorganisms, e.g. Clostridium perfringens. Acrolein is a relatively electrophilic compound and a reactive one, hence its high toxicity. It is a good Michael acceptor, hence its useful reaction with thiols. It forms acetals readily, a prominent one being the spirocycle derived from pentaerythritol, diallylidene pentaerythritol. Acrolein participates in many Diels-Alder reactions, even with itself. Via Diels-Alder reactions, it is a precursor to some commercial fragrances, including lyral, norbornene-2-carboxaldehyde, and myrac aldehyde. Acrolein is toxic and is a strong irritant for the skin, eyes, and nasal passages. The main metabolic pathway for acrolein is the alkylation of glutathione. The WHO suggests a 'tolerable oral acrolein intake' of 7.5 mg/day per kilogram of body weight. Although acrolein occurs in French fries, the levels are only a few micrograms per kilogram.|
HMDB0059777::2,2,4-Trimethyl-1,3-pentadienol diisobutyrate, also known as kodaflex txib, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as dicarboxylic acids and derivatives. These are organic compounds containing exactly two carboxylic acid groups. 2,2,4-Trimethyl-1,3-pentadienol diisobutyrate exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. 2,2,4-Trimethyl-1,3-pentadienol diisobutyrate has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, 2,2,4-trimethyl-1,3-pentadienol diisobutyrate is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). 2,2,4-Trimethyl-1,3-pentadienol diisobutyrate is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0033840::Dihydro-5-methyl-2(3H)-furanone is found in alcoholic beverages. Dihydro-5-methyl-2(3H)-furanone is a flavouring agent. Dihydro-5-methyl-2(3H)-furanone is present in peach, strawberry jam, tomato, wheat bread, Swiss cheese, Gruyere de Comte cheese, heated butter, cooked beef, white wine, red wine, coffee, black tea, roasted filbert, roasted peanut and Bourbon vanilla.|
HMDB0035833::Terpinen-4-ol, also known as terpinenol-4 or 1-menthene-4-ol, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as menthane monoterpenoids. These are monoterpenoids with a structure based on the o-, m-, or p-menthane backbone. P-menthane consists of the cyclohexane ring with a methyl group and a (2-methyl)-propyl group at the 1 and 4 ring position, respectively. The o- and m- menthanes are much rarer, and presumably arise by alkyl migration of p-menthanes. Terpinen-4-ol is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak acidic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). Terpinen-4-ol has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, terpinen-4-ol is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Terpinen-4-ol exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Terpinen-4-ol is a sweet, earth, and musty tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as white cabbage, yellow bell pepper, red bell pepper, and nutmeg. This makes terpinen-4-ol a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0004043::Alpha-Terpineol is a naturally occurring monoterpene alcohol that has been isolated from a variety of sources such as cajuput oil, pine oil, and petitgrain oil. There are three isomers of terpineol, alpha-, beta-, and gamma-terpineol, with the last two differing only by the location of the double bond. Terpineol is usually a mixture of these isomers with alpha-terpineol as the major constituent. Terpineol has a pleasant odor similar to lilac and is a common ingredient in perfumes, cosmetics, and flavors (Wikipedia). alpha-Terpineol is occasionally found as a volatile component in urine. It is a water-soluble component of Melaleuca alternifolia Cheel, the tea tree oil (TTO). alpha-Terpineol is a likely mediator of the in vitro and in vivo activity of the TTO as an agent that could control C. albicans vaginal infections. Purified alpha-Terpineol can suppress pro-inflammatory mediator production by activated human monocytes. alpha-Terpineol is able to impair the growth of human M14 melanoma cells and appear to be more effective on their resistant variants, which express high levels of P-glycoprotein in the plasma membrane, overcoming resistance to caspase-dependent apoptosis exerted by P-glycoprotein-positive tumor cells. (PMID: 5556886  , 17083732  , 11131302  , 15009716  ).|
HMDB0061896::2-Methyl-3-hexanone belongs to the class of organic compounds known as ketones. These are organic compounds  in which a carbonyl group is bonded to two carbon atoms R2C=O (neither R may be a hydrogen atom). Ketones that have one or more alpha-hydrogen atoms undergo keto-enol tautomerization, the tautomer being an enol.|
HMDB0005841::Ethyl isobutyl ketone is a volatile organic compound (VOC). Ethyl isobutyl ketone is occasionally found as a volatile component of normal human biofluids. It is a component of the feces in about 25% of the normal population. Volatile organic compounds from feces have the potential to help in the diagnosis of gastrointestinal disease. (PMID: 5556886  , 17314143  ).|
HMDB0031582::6-Methyl-3,5-heptadien-2-one, also known as 2-methylhepta-2,4-dien-6-one or fema 3363, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as enones. Enones are compounds containing the enone functional group, with the structure RC(=O)CR'. 6-Methyl-3,5-heptadien-2-one is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak acidic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). 6-Methyl-3,5-heptadien-2-one has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, 6-methyl-3,5-heptadien-2-one is primarily located in the cytoplasm. 6-Methyl-3,5-heptadien-2-one has a sweet, cinnamon, and coconut taste.|
HMDB0035239::4-Hexen-3-one, also known as (e)-2-hexen-4-one or fema 3352, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as enones. Enones are compounds containing the enone functional group, with the structure RC(=O)CR'. 4-Hexen-3-one is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). 4-Hexen-3-one has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, 4-hexen-3-one is primarily located in the cytoplasm. 4-Hexen-3-one is an ethereal, green, and metallic tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as devilfish, atlantic herring, sparkleberry, and common chokecherry. This makes 4-hexen-3-one a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0036453::3,4-Dihydrocadalene, also known as (e)-calacorene or alpha-corocalen, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as sesquiterpenoids. These are terpenes with three consecutive isoprene units. 3,4-Dihydrocadalene is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. 3,4-Dihydrocadalene has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, 3,4-dihydrocadalene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. 3,4-Dihydrocadalene is a woody tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as cloves, rosemary, root vegetables, and alcoholic beverages. This makes 3,4-dihydrocadalene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0031476::, also known as heptane-23-dione or 2,3-dioxoheptane, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as alpha-diketones. These are organic compounds containing two ketone groups on two adjacent carbon atoms. Thus, is considered to be an oxygenated hydrocarbon lipid molecule. is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak acidic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, is primarily located in the cytoplasm. is a butter, cheese, and oily tasting compound that can be found in alcoholic beverages, garden tomato, mushrooms, and pulses. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0005843::Allyl isothiocyanate is a volatile organic compound. Allyl isothiocyanate (AITC) is a constituent of mustard, horseradish and wasabi and certain vegetables found in the human diet, mostly in cruciferous vegetables. AITC is a colorless to pale yellow liquid that is slightly soluble in water, but well soluble in most organic solvents. AITC possesses numerous biochemical and physiological activities. It is cytotoxic and tumorigenic at high doses and also is a modulator of enzymes involved in metabolism of xenobiotics, including carcinogens. It is plausible that the wide consumption of dietary AITC may have profound effects on human health. oxidative DNA damage may play important roles in carcinogenic processes induced by AITC. Allergic contact dermatitis from AICT is well known but infrequently reported. AITC is occasionally found as a volatile component of normal human biofluids. (PMID: 5556886  , 8222057  , 8000299  , 10754276  , 15373848  ).|
HMDB0039619::Isopropyl butyrate is found in alcoholic beverages. Isopropyl butyrate is present in apricot, kumquat peel oil, American cranberry, papaya, strawberry, spineless monkey orange and sparkling wine. Isopropyl butyrate is a flavouring ingredient.|
HMDB0033745::Ethyl 2-methylbutyrate is found in bilberry. Ethyl 2-methylbutyrate is found in many fruits, e.g.raw and cooked apple, apricot, orange, grapefruit. Ethyl 2-methylbutyrate is a flavouring agent. Ethyl 2-methylbutyrate is used in fruit flavouring.|
HMDB0034161::2-Methylpropyl butanoate, also known as butyric acid, isobutyl ester or isobutyl butanoate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty acid esters. These are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. 2-Methylpropyl butanoate is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). 2-Methylpropyl butanoate has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, 2-methylpropyl butanoate is primarily located in the cytoplasm. 2-Methylpropyl butanoate exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. 2-Methylpropyl butanoate can be biosynthesized from isobutanol. 2-Methylpropyl butanoate is a sweet, apple, and berry tasting compound that can be found in apple, fruits, and roman camomile. This makes 2-methylpropyl butanoate a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0038040::2-Methylpropyl 3-methylbutanoate, also known as isobutyl isovalerate or 2-methylpropyl isovalerate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty acid esters. These are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. 2-Methylpropyl 3-methylbutanoate is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). 2-Methylpropyl 3-methylbutanoate has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, 2-methylpropyl 3-methylbutanoate is primarily located in the cytoplasm. 2-Methylpropyl 3-methylbutanoate is a sweet, apple, and banana tasting compound that can be found in fig, pepper (spice), and roman camomile. This makes 2-methylpropyl 3-methylbutanoate a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0030027::Methyl 3-methylbutanoate is found in citrus. Methyl 3-methylbutanoate is a flavouring ingredient. Methyl 3-methylbutanoate is present in fruits of apple, banana, bilberry, wild blueberry, melon, pineapple, strawberry, and some Florida oranges. Also found in peas, peppermint oil and gruyere de comte cheese. Pungent apple-like odour; bitter flavou|
HMDB0032047::Propyl 3-methylbutanoate, also known as fema 2960 or N-propyl iso-valerate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty acid esters. These are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. Propyl 3-methylbutanoate is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). Propyl 3-methylbutanoate has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, propyl 3-methylbutanoate is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Propyl 3-methylbutanoate is a sweet, apple, and bitter tasting compound that can be found in fruits and milk and milk products. This makes propyl 3-methylbutanoate a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0040221::Isoamyl butyrate is found in alcoholic beverages. Isoamyl butyrate is present in fruit aromas, e.g. apricot, melon, mango etc. Also present in wines, eucalyptus oil and coconut oil. Isoamyl butyrate is used in fruit flavours.|
HMDB0059839::Camphene, also known as 2,2-dimethyl-3-methylenebicyclo[2.2.1]heptane or 2,2-dimethyl-3-methylenenorbornane, is a member of the class of compounds known as bicyclic monoterpenoids. Bicyclic monoterpenoids are monoterpenoids containing exactly 2 rings, which are fused to each other. Camphene can be found in a number of food items such as dill, caraway, hyssop, and fennel, which makes camphene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. Camphene can be found in feces and saliva. Camphene exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Camphene is nearly insoluble in water but very soluble in common organic solvents. It volatilizes readily at room temperature and has a pungent smell. It is a minor constituent of many essential oils such as turpentine, cypress oil, camphor oil, citronella oil, neroli, ginger oil, and valerian. It is produced industrially by catalytic isomerization of the more common alpha-pinene. Camphene is used in the preparation of fragrances and as a food additive for flavouring. Its mid-19th century use as a fuel for lamps was limited by its explosiveness (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0036467::Alpha-Humulene, also known as Α-humulene, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as sesquiterpenoids. These are terpenes with three consecutive isoprene units. Alpha-Humulene exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Alpha-Humulene has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, Alpha-humulene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Alpha-Humulene is a woody tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as chinese cinnamon, hyssop, common sage, and cloves. This makes Alpha-humulene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0031342::Cyclohexanecarboxylic acid, also known as hexahydrobenzoic acid or carboxycyclohexane, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acids. Carboxylic acids are compounds containing a carboxylic acid group with the formula -C(=O)OH. Cyclohexanecarboxylic acid exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Cyclohexanecarboxylic acid has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, cyclohexanecarboxylic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Cyclohexanecarboxylic acid is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, cyclohexanecarboxylate ester, tranexamic acid, and 4-oxocyclohexanecarboxylic acid. Cyclohexanecarboxylic acid has an acidic, cheese, and fruity taste.|
HMDB0033167::Ethyl cyclohexanecarboxylate, also known as ethoxycarbonylcyclohexane or ethyl cyclohexylformate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbon atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or an aryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group). Ethyl cyclohexanecarboxylate is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Ethyl cyclohexanecarboxylate has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, ethyl cyclohexanecarboxylate is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). Ethyl cyclohexanecarboxylate has a cheese, fruity, and winey taste.|
HMDB0037020::p-Menthan-1-ol, also known as dihydroterpineol, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as menthane monoterpenoids. These are monoterpenoids with a structure based on the o-, m-, or p-menthane backbone. P-menthane consists of the cyclohexane ring with a methyl group and a (2-methyl)-propyl group at the 1 and 4 ring position, respectively. The o- and m- menthanes are much rarer, and presumably arise by alkyl migration of p-menthanes. p-Menthan-1-ol is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. p-Menthan-1-ol has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, p-menthan-1-ol is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Outside of the human body, p-menthan-1-ol can be found in herbs and spices. This makes p-menthan-1-ol a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product.|
HMDB0000387::3-Hydroxydodecanoic acid is a medium-chain fatty acid associated with fatty acid metabolic disorders (PMID 11948802  ). Deficiency of medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase is characterized by intolerance to prolonged fasting, recurrent episodes of hypoglycemic coma with medium-chain dicarboxylic aciduria, impaired ketogenesis, and low plasma and tissue carnitine levels. (OMIM 201450  ).|
HMDB0004472::Eucalyptol is an organic compound which is a colorless liquid. It is a cyclic ether and a monoterpene. Eucalyptol is a natural constituent of a number of aromatic plants and their essential oil fraction. Eucalyptol was given GRAS (Generally Recognized As Safe) status by the Flavor and Extract Manufacturer's Association FEMA, 1965 and is approved by the Food and Drug Administration for food use. 1,8-Dihydroxy-10-carboxy-p-menthane, 2-hydroxy-cineole and 3-hydroxy-cineole are the main metabolites of Eucalyptol. Toxicological data available on eucalyptol are rather limited. Following the accidental exposure of human beings, death was reported in two cases after ingestion of 3.5-5 ml of essential eucalyptus oil, but a number of recoveries have also been described for much higher amounts of oil. In a 1994 report released by five top cigarette companies, eucalyptol was listed as one of the 599 additives to cigarettes. It is added to improve the flavor. (PMID: 12048025  , Fitoterapia. 2002 Jun;73(3):269-75).|
HMDB0040575::Butyl formate, also known as butyl methanoate or fema 2916, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbon atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or an aryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group). Butyl formate exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). Butyl formate has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, butyl formate is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Butyl formate can be biosynthesized from butan-1-ol. Butyl formate is a brandy, fruity, and plum tasting compound that can be found in blackcurrant and pineapple. This makes butyl formate a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0013749::2-Methylfuran is a flammable, water-soluble liquid with a chocolate odor, found naturally in Myrtle and Dutch Lavender used as a FEMA GRAS (Generally Recognized As Safe) flavoring substance, with the potential for use in alternative fuels.|
HMDB0037788::Xi-2,3-dihydro-3-methylfuran belongs to the class of organic compounds known as dihydrofurans. Dihydrofurans are compounds containing a dihydrofuran moiety, which is a furan derivative with only one double bond. Xi-2,3-dihydro-3-methylfuran is soluble (in water) and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). Xi-2,3-dihydro-3-methylfuran has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, xi-2,3-dihydro-3-methylfuran is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Outside of the human body, xi-2,3-dihydro-3-methylfuran can be found in root vegetables. This makes xi-2,3-dihydro-3-methylfuran a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product.|
HMDB0038169::Myrcene, also known as beta-myrcene or alpha-myrcene, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as acyclic monoterpenoids. These are monoterpenes that do not contain a cycle. Thus, myrcene is considered to be an isoprenoid lipid molecule. Myrcene exists as a liquid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Myrcene has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, myrcene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Myrcene exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Myrcene is a balsamic, must, and peppery tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as lime, cumin, cornmint, and pot marjoram. This makes myrcene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. Myrcene is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0032045::Pentyl 3-methylbutanoate, also known as 1-pentyl isovalerate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty acid esters. These are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. Pentyl 3-methylbutanoate is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Pentyl 3-methylbutanoate has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, pentyl 3-methylbutanoate is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Pentyl 3-methylbutanoate has an apple, fresh, and fruity taste.|
HMDB0032272::Ethyl 4-methylpentanoate, also known as ethyl 4-methylvalerate or ethyl isocaproate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as fatty acid esters. These are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. Ethyl 4-methylpentanoate is slightly soluble (in water) and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). Ethyl 4-methylpentanoate has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, ethyl 4-methylpentanoate is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Ethyl 4-methylpentanoate exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Ethyl 4-methylpentanoate has a fruity taste.|
HMDB0040295::Butyl pentanoate is found in alcoholic beverages. Butyl pentanoate is present in apple, banana, blackberry, plum, jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus), malt whisky and Bourbon vanilla. Butyl pentanoate is a flavouring agent.|
HMDB0034970::(S)-alpha-Phellandrene is found in ceylan cinnamon. (S)-alpha-Phellandrene is a flavouring agent. (S)-alpha-Phellandrene is a constituent  of many essential oils including bitter fennel, elemi and ginger-grass oils. Oil of Ridolfia segetum is a major source (85%).Phellandrene is the name for a pair of organic compounds that have a similar molecular structure and similar chemical properties. alpha-Phellandrene and beta-phellandrene are cyclic monoterpenes and are double-bond isomers. The phellandrenes are used in fragrances because of their pleasing aromas. (Wikipedia|
HMDB0035851::(R)-alpha-Phellandrene is found in herbs and spices. (R)-alpha-Phellandrene is a constituent of oils of pimento, bay, Citrus, Juniperus, Mentha, and other essential oils. Oil of Zanthoxylum alatum is a major source (50%). (R)-alpha-Phellandrene is a flavouring agent.Phellandrene is the name for a pair of organic compounds that have a similar molecular structure and similar chemical properties. alpha-Phellandrene and beta-phellandrene are cyclic monoterpenes and are double-bond isomers. The phellandrenes are used in fragrances because of their pleasing aromas. (Wikipedia)|
HMDB0036081::beta-Phellandrene is found in allspice. beta-Phellandrene is widely distributed in essential oils (Angelica, Eucalyptus, Lavandula, Mentha, Pinus species). beta-Phellandrene is a flavour ingredient.Phellandrene is the name for a pair of organic compounds that have a similar molecular structure and similar chemical properties. alpha-Phellandrene and beta-phellandrene are cyclic monoterpenes and are double-bond isomers. The phellandrenes are used in fragrances because of their pleasing aromas. (Wikipedia|
HMDB0041633::(-)-beta-Phellandrene is found in pine nut. Phellandrene is the name for a pair of organic compounds that have a similar molecular structure and similar chemical properties. alpha-Phellandrene and beta-phellandrene are cyclic monoterpenes and are double-bond isomers. The phellandrenes are used in fragrances because of their pleasing aromas. (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0041634::(+)-beta-Phellandrene is found in ginger. Phellandrene is the name for a pair of organic compounds that have a similar molecular structure and similar chemical properties. alpha-Phellandrene and beta-phellandrene are cyclic monoterpenes and are double-bond isomers. The phellandrenes are used in fragrances because of their pleasing aromas. (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0013816::2,6-di-tert-butylphenol is an organic compound with the structural formula 2,6-((CH3)3C)2C6H3OH. This colourless solid alkylated phenol and its derivatives are used industrially as UV stabilizer and an antioxidant for hydrocarbon-based products ranging from petrochemicals to plastics. Illustrative of its usefulness, it prevents gumming in aviation fuels.|
HMDB0002048::m-Cresol is an isomer of p-cresol and o-cresol. Cresols are organic compounds which are methylphenols. They are a widely occurring natural and manufactured group of aromatic organic compounds which are categorized as phenols (sometimes called phenolics). Depending on the temperature, cresols can be solid or liquid because they have melting points not far from room temperature. Like other types of phenols, they are slowly oxidized by long exposure to air and the impurities often give cresols a yellowish to brownish red tint.| Cresols have an odor characteristic to that of other simple phenols, reminiscent to some of a "medicine" smell. Cresol solutions are used as household cleaners and disinfectants, perhaps most famously under the trade name Lysol. In the past, cresol solutions have been used as antiseptics in surgery, but they have been largely displaced in this role by less toxic compounds. Lysol was also advertised as a disinfecting vaginal douche in mid-twentieth century America. Cresols are found in many foods and in wood and tobacco smoke, crude oil, coal tar, and in brown mixtures such as creosote and cresylic acids, which are wood preservatives. Small organisms in soil and water produce cresols when they break down materials in the environment. Most exposures to cresols are at very low levels that are not harmful. When cresols are breathed, ingested, or applied to the skin at very high levels, they can be very harmful. Effects observed in people include irritation and burning of skin, eyes, mouth, and throat; abdominal pain and vomiting; heart damage; anemia; liver and kidney damage; facial paralysis; coma; and death. Breathing high levels of cresols for a short time results in irritation of the nose and throat. Aside from these effects, very little is known about the effects of breathing cresols, for example, at lower levels over longer times. Ingesting high levels results in kidney problems, mouth and throat burns, abdominal pain, vomiting, and effects on the blood and nervous system. Skin contact with high levels of cresols can burn the skin and damage the kidneys, liver, blood, brain, and lungs. (wikipedia).|
HMDB0036559::(-)-beta-Pinene, also known as (1S,5S)-b-pinene or L-b-pinene, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as bicyclic monoterpenoids. These are monoterpenoids containing exactly 2 rings, which are fused to each other. Thus, (-)-beta-pinene is considered to be an isoprenoid lipid molecule (-)-beta-Pinene exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral (-)-beta-Pinene has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, (-)-beta-pinene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm (-)-beta-Pinene is a dry, fresh, and green tasting compound that can be found in almond, common sage, hyssop, and sweet bay. This makes (-)-beta-pinene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0031857::3-(Methylthio)propanal is found in cereals and cereal products. 3-(Methylthio)propanal is a flavouring ingredient. 3-(Methylthio)propanal is present in concord grape, asparagus, baked potato, wheat bread, other breads, Swiss cheese, cocoa, roasted filbert, roasted peanut and other foodstuff|
HMDB0030056::Isopropyl propionate, also known as C2H5C(O)OCH(CH3)2 or fema 2959, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbon atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or an aryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group). Isopropyl propionate is soluble (in water) and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). Isopropyl propionate has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, isopropyl propionate is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Isopropyl propionate has a sweet, banana, and bitter taste.|
HMDB0031249::Methyl isobutyrate is found in fruits. Methyl isobutyrate is found in various fruits, e.g. apple, banana, kumquat peel, wild blueberry, strawberry. Also present in French fried potato, dill herb and Russian champagnes. Methyl isobutyrate is a flavouring agent|
HMDB0034239::, also known as fema 2212, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as carboxylic acid esters. These are carboxylic acid derivatives in which the carbon atom from the carbonyl group is attached to an alkyl or an aryl moiety through an oxygen atom (forming an ester group). Thus, is considered to be a fatty ester lipid molecule. exists as a solid, slightly soluble (in water), and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, is primarily located in the cytoplasm. has a sweet, banana, and bitter taste.|
HMDB0006006::Isobutanol is an aliphatic alcohol. Isobutanol is a colorless, flammable, organic compound with a characteristic smell. Isobutanol is widely used in industry, as a solvent in chemical reactions, as well as being a useful starting material for organic synthesis. Isobutanol is a flammable liquid that should be stored and used in well-ventilated areas. It is moderately irritating to the skin and greatly irritating to the eyes, mucous membranes and respiratory tract. Exposure to high concentrations of its vapour can cause temporary narcosis. Isobutanol is occasionally found as a volatile component of urine and arises from gut microbial metabolism. Isobutanol is used as one of the markers to measure occupational exposure to a mixture of solvents. Aliphatic alcohols levels increase in both diabetes mellitus and insulin-dependent diabetes patients. (PMID: 5556886  , 2477620  , 9143482  , 7627316  , 2288731  ).|
HMDB0031653::3-(Methylthio)-1-propene, also known as methyl propenyl sulfide or allyl methyl sulfide, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as allyl sulfur compounds. Allyl sulfur compounds are compounds containing an allylsulfur group, with the general structure H2C(=CH2)CS. 3-(Methylthio)-1-propene is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. 3-(Methylthio)-1-propene has been primarily detected in saliva, feces, urine, and breast milk. Within the cell, 3-(methylthio)-1-propene is primarily located in the cytoplasm. 3-(Methylthio)-1-propene is an alliaceous, garlic, and onion tasting compound that can be found in garden onion, ginger, onion-family vegetables, and soft-necked garlic. This makes 3-(methylthio)-1-propene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0031445::Undecane is found in allspice. Undecane (also known as hendecane) is a liquid alkane hydrocarbon with the chemical formula CH3(CH2)9CH3. It is used as a mild sex attractant for various types of moths and cockroaches, and an alert signal for a variety of ants. It has 159 isomers. (Wikipedia|
HMDB0036163::Beta-Sesquiphellandrene belongs to the class of organic compounds known as sesquiterpenoids. These are terpenes with three consecutive isoprene units. Beta-Sesquiphellandrene is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Beta-Sesquiphellandrene has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, Beta-sesquiphellandrene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm. Beta-Sesquiphellandrene is a fruity, herbal, and woody tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as common oregano, rosemary, parsley, and ginger. This makes Beta-sesquiphellandrene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0094652::2-octene, 3,7-dimethyl-, (z)- is classified as a member of the branched unsaturated hydrocarbons. Branched unsaturated hydrocarbons are hydrocarbons that contains one or more unsaturated carbon atoms, and an aliphatic branch. 2-octene, 3,7-dimethyl-, (z)- can be found in feces.|
HMDB0001425::Estrone sulfate is a sulfated estrone derivative. Estrone sulfate acts as a long-lived reservoir that can be converted as needed to the more active estradiol (from estrone via 17 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase). Estrone Sulfate (E1S) is the most abundant circulating estrogen in non-pregnant women as well as normal men. Estrone is primarily synthesized from estrone sulfate. Estrone is an estrogenic hormone secreted by the ovaries and adipose tissues. Estrone is one of the three estrogens found in humans. The other two are estriol and estradiol. Estrone is the least prevalent of the three. Estradiol plays a critical role on reproductive and sexual functioning in women and it also affects other organs including the bones. Estriol is an estrogen that is prevalent primarily during pregnancy.|
HMDB0004969::Glucosylceramide (d18:1/12:0) is a glycosphingolipid (ceramide and oligosaccharide)or oligoglycosylceramide with one or more sialic acids (i.e. n-acetylneuraminic acid) linked on the sugar chain. It is a component the cell plasma membrane which modulates cell signal transduction events. Gangliosides have been found to be highly important in immunology. Ganglioside GL1a carries a net-negative charge at pH 7.0 and is acidic. Gangliosides can amount to 6% of the weight of lipids from brain, but they are found at low levels in all animal tissues.Cerebrosides are glycosphingolipids. There are four types of glycosphingolipids, the cerebrosides, sulfatides, globosides and gangliosides. Cerebrosides have a single sugar group linked to ceramide. The most common are galactocerebrosides (containing galactose), the least common are glucocerebrosides (containing glucose). Galactocerebrosides are found predominantly in neuronal cell membranes. In contrast glucocerebrosides are not normally found in membranes. Instead, they are typically intermediates in the synthesis or degradation of more complex glycosphingolipids. Galactocerebrosides are synthesized from ceramide and UDP-galactose. Excess lysosomal accumulation of glucocerebrosides is found in Gaucher disease.|
HMDB0001319::Pyridoxine 5'-phosphate, also known as pyridoxine phosphoric acid or pyridoxine-5P, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as pyridoxine-5'-phosphates. These are pyridoxines that carry a phosphate group at the 5-position. Pyridoxine 5'-phosphate is slightly soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). Pyridoxine 5'-phosphate has been primarily detected in blood. Within the cell, pyridoxine 5'-phosphate is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Pyridoxine 5'-phosphate exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Pyridoxine 5'-phosphate participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, Pyridoxine 5'-phosphate can be biosynthesized from pyridoxine through the action of the enzyme pyridoxal kinase. Furthermore, Pyridoxine 5'-phosphate can be converted into pyridoxal 5'-phosphate through the action of the enzyme pyridoxine-5'-phosphate oxidase. Furthermore, Pyridoxine 5'-phosphate can be biosynthesized from 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate and 2-amino-3-phosphonopropionic acid through its interaction with the enzyme pyridoxine 5'-phosphate synthase. Finally, Pyridoxine 5'-phosphate can be biosynthesized from pyridoxine; which is catalyzed by the enzyme pyridoxal kinase. In humans, pyridoxine 5'-phosphate is involved in the vitamin B6 metabolism pathway. Pyridoxine 5'-phosphate is also involved in the metabolic disorder called the hypophosphatasia pathway.|
HMDB0010385::LysoPC(18:1(11Z)) is a lysophospholipid (LyP). It is a monoglycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. Lysophosphatidylcholines can have different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 (sn-1) position. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. LysoPC(18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Lysophosphatidylcholine is found in small amounts in most tissues. It is formed by hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by the enzyme phospholipase A2, as part of the de-acylation/re-acylation cycle that controls its overall molecular species composition. It can also be formed inadvertently during extraction of lipids from tissues if the phospholipase is activated by careless handling. In blood plasma significant amounts of lysophosphatidylcholine are formed by a specific enzyme system, lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), which is secreted from the liver. The enzyme catalyzes the transfer of the fatty acids of position sn-2 of phosphatidylcholine to the free cholesterol in plasma, with formation of cholesterol esters and lysophosphatidylcholine. Lysophospholipids have a role in lipid signaling by acting on lysophospholipid receptors (LPL-R). LPL-R's are members of the G protein-coupled receptor family of integral membrane proteins.|
HMDB0010396::LysoPC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a lysophospholipid (LyP). It is a monoglycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. Lysophosphatidylcholines can have different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 (sn-1) position. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. LysoPC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Lysophosphatidylcholine is found in small amounts in most tissues. It is formed by hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by the enzyme phospholipase A2, as part of the de-acylation/re-acylation cycle that controls its overall molecular species composition. It can also be formed inadvertently during extraction of lipids from tissues if the phospholipase is activated by careless handling. In blood plasma significant amounts of lysophosphatidylcholine are formed by a specific enzyme system, lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), which is secreted from the liver. The enzyme catalyzes the transfer of the fatty acids of position sn-2 of phosphatidylcholine to the free cholesterol in plasma, with formation of cholesterol esters and lysophosphatidylcholine. Lysophospholipids have a role in lipid signaling by acting on lysophospholipid receptors (LPL-R). LPL-R's are members of the G protein-coupled receptor family of integral membrane proteins.|
HMDB0010408::LysoPC(P-18:1(9Z)) is a lysophospholipid (LyP). It is a monoglycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. Lysophosphatidylcholines can have different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 (sn-1) position. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. LysoPC(P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Lysophosphatidylcholine is found in small amounts in most tissues. It is formed by hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by the enzyme phospholipase A2, as part of the de-acylation/re-acylation cycle that controls its overall molecular species composition. It can also be formed inadvertently during extraction of lipids from tissues if the phospholipase is activated by careless handling. In blood plasma significant amounts of lysophosphatidylcholine are formed by a specific enzyme system, lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), which is secreted from the liver. The enzyme catalyzes the transfer of the fatty acids of position sn-2 of phosphatidylcholine to the free cholesterol in plasma, with formation of cholesterol esters and lysophosphatidylcholine. Lysophospholipids have a role in lipid signaling by acting on lysophospholipid receptors (LPL-R). LPL-R's are members of the G protein-coupled receptor family of integral membrane proteins.| Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0013424::PC(o-18:1(11Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:1(11Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Vaccenyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The Vaccenyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013426::PC(o-18:1(9Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:1(9Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Oleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The Oleyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, fish oil, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013428::PC(o-18:1(9Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:1(9Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Oleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The Oleyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, fish oil, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013429::PC(o-18:1(9Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:1(9Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Oleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The Oleyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, fish oil, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013436::PC(o-18:2(9Z,12Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:2(9Z,12Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Linoleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The Linoleyl alcohol moiety is derived from seed oils, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013324::2-Octenoylcarnitine is classified as a member of the fatty acid esters. Fatty acid esters are carboxylic ester derivatives of a fatty acid. 2-Octenoylcarnitine is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. 2-Octenoylcarnitine can be found in blood and urine. Within a cell, 2-octenoylcarnitine is primarily located in the extracellular space and near the membrane.|
HMDB0007869::PC(14:0/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007871::PC(14:0/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007873::PC(14:0/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007874::PC(14:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007875::PC(14:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007876::PC(14:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007882::PC(14:0/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007884::PC(14:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007888::PC(14:0/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007891::PC(14:0/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007895::PC(14:0/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0007896::PC(14:0/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0007897::PC(14:0/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0007898::PC(14:0/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:0/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0007899::PC(14:1(9Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007904::PC(14:1(9Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007905::PC(14:1(9Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007906::PC(14:1(9Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007907::PC(14:1(9Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007911::PC(14:1(9Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007912::PC(14:1(9Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007913::PC(14:1(9Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007914::PC(14:1(9Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007915::PC(14:1(9Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007919::PC(14:1(9Z)/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007920::PC(14:1(9Z)/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007922::PC(14:1(9Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of adrenic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007923::PC(14:1(9Z)/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007924::PC(14:1(9Z)/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007929::PC(14:1(9Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0007930::PC(14:1(9Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0007931::PC(14:1(9Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(14:1(9Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0007934::PC(15:0/15:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(15:0/15:0), in particular, consists of two chains of pentadecanoic acid at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The pentadecanoic acid moieties are derived from dairy products and milk fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007965::PC(16:0/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007969::PC(16:0/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007971::PC(16:0/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007972::PC(16:0/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007973::PC(16:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007974::PC(16:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007975::PC(16:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007976::PC(16:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007977::PC(16:0/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007978::PC(16:0/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007979::PC(16:0/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007980::PC(16:0/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007981::PC(16:0/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007982::PC(16:0/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007983::PC(16:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007984::PC(16:0/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007985::PC(16:0/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007990::PC(16:0/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.|PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0007994::PC(16:0/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0007996::PC(16:0/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0007997::PC(16:0/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:0/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008001::PC(16:1(9Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008002::PC(16:1(9Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of two chains of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The palmitoleic acid moieties are derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid.| PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008003::PC(16:1(9Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008004::PC(16:1(9Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008005::PC(16:1(9Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008006::PC(16:1(9Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008007::PC(16:1(9Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008008::PC(16:1(9Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008010::PC(16:1(9Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008011::PC(16:1(9Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008012::PC(16:1(9Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008013::PC(16:1(9Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008014::PC(16:1(9Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008015::PC(16:1(9Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008016::PC(16:1(9Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008017::PC(16:1(9Z)/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008021::PC(16:1(9Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of adrenic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008022::PC(16:1(9Z)/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008024::PC(16:1(9Z)/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008027::PC(16:1(9Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008028::PC(16:1(9Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008029::PC(16:1(9Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008030::PC(16:1(9Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008031::PC(18:0/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008032::PC(18:0/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008035::PC(18:0/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008036::PC(18:0/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/18:0), in particular, consists of two chains of stearic acid at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The stearic acid moieties are derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid.| PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008037::PC(18:0/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008038::PC(18:0/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008039::PC(18:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008040::PC(18:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008041::PC(18:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008042::PC(18:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008043::PC(18:0/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008046::PC(18:0/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008047::PC(18:0/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008048::PC(18:0/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008049::PC(18:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008050::PC(18:0/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008053::PC(18:0/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008056::PC(18:0/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008061::PC(18:0/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008062::PC(18:0/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008063::PC(18:0/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:0/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008064::PC(18:1(11Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008065::PC(18:1(11Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008067::PC(18:1(11Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008068::PC(18:1(11Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008069::PC(18:1(11Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008070::PC(18:1(11Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of two chains of vaccenic acid at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The vaccenic acid moieties are derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid.| PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008071::PC(18:1(11Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008072::PC(18:1(11Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008073::PC(18:1(11Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008074::PC(18:1(11Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008075::PC(18:1(11Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008078::PC(18:1(11Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008079::PC(18:1(11Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008080::PC(18:1(11Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008081::PC(18:1(11Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008082::PC(18:1(11Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008083::PC(18:1(11Z)/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008085::PC(18:1(11Z)/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008087::PC(18:1(11Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of adrenic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008088::PC(18:1(11Z)/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008089::PC(18:1(11Z)/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008091::PC(18:1(11Z)/24:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/24:0), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008093::PC(18:1(11Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008094::PC(18:1(11Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008095::PC(18:1(11Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008096::PC(18:1(11Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(11Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008097::PC(18:1(9Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008098::PC(18:1(9Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008100::PC(18:1(9Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008101::PC(18:1(9Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008102::PC(18:1(9Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008103::PC(18:1(9Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008105::PC(18:1(9Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008106::PC(18:1(9Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008107::PC(18:1(9Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008108::PC(18:1(9Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008111::PC(18:1(9Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008112::PC(18:1(9Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008113::PC(18:1(9Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008114::PC(18:1(9Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008115::PC(18:1(9Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008116::PC(18:1(9Z)/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008118::PC(18:1(9Z)/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008119::PC(18:1(9Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008120::PC(18:1(9Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of adrenic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008121::PC(18:1(9Z)/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008122::PC(18:1(9Z)/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008124::PC(18:1(9Z)/24:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/24:0), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008125::PC(18:1(9Z)/24:1(15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/24:1(15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of nervonic acid at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008126::PC(18:1(9Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008127::PC(18:1(9Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008128::PC(18:1(9Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008129::PC(18:1(9Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:1(9Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of oleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008130::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008131::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008133::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008134::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008135::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008136::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008137::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008138::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of two chains of linoleic acid at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The linoleic acid moieties are derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid.| PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008140::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008141::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008142::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008144::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008145::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008139::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008146::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008147::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008148::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008150::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008151::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008152::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008153::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of adrenic acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008157::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/24:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/24:0), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008159::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008160::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008161::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008162::PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:2(9Z,12Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of linoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008163::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008166::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008167::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008168::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008169::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008170::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008171::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008172::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of two chains of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The g-linolenic acid moieties are derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid.| PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008173::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008175::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008176::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008177::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008178::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008179::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008183::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008184::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008185::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008192::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008193::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008194::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008195::PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008196::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008199::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008200::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008201::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008202::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008203::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008204::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008205::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008206::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of two chains of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The a-linolenic acid moieties are derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008208::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008209::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008210::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008211::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008212::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008216::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008217::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008218::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008224::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/24:1(15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/24:1(15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of nervonic acid at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008225::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008226::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008227::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008228::PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008232::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008234::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008235::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008236::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008237::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008241::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008242::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008243::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008249::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008250::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008251::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008256::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/24:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/24:0), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008258::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008259::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008260::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008261::PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008263::PC(20:0/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008265::PC(20:0/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008266::PC(20:0/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008267::PC(20:0/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008271::PC(20:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008272::PC(20:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008273::PC(20:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008276::PC(20:0/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008277::PC(20:0/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008278::PC(20:0/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008279::PC(20:0/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008280::PC(20:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008281::PC(20:0/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008282::PC(20:0/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008283::PC(20:0/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008284::PC(20:0/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008285::PC(20:0/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of adrenic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008286::PC(20:0/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008287::PC(20:0/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008291::PC(20:0/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008292::PC(20:0/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:0/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008295::PC(20:1(11Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008296::PC(20:1(11Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008298::PC(20:1(11Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008299::PC(20:1(11Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008303::PC(20:1(11Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008304::PC(20:1(11Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008305::PC(20:1(11Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008306::PC(20:1(11Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008308::PC(20:1(11Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of two chains of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The eicosenoic acid moieties are derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid.| PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008309::PC(20:1(11Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008310::PC(20:1(11Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008311::PC(20:1(11Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008312::PC(20:1(11Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008313::PC(20:1(11Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008314::PC(20:1(11Z)/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008315::PC(20:1(11Z)/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008316::PC(20:1(11Z)/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008318::PC(20:1(11Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of adrenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008324::PC(20:1(11Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:1(11Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008328::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008329::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008331::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008332::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008334::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008335::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008336::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008337::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008338::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008339::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008340::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008341::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008342::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of two chains of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The eicosadienoic acid moieties are derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid.| PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008343::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008344::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008345::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008346::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008348::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008350::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008357::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008359::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008360::PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:2(11Z,14Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008361::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008362::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008364::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008365::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008366::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008367::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008368::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008369::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008370::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008371::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008373::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008374::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008375::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008376::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of two chains of mead acid at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The mead acid moieties are derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid.| PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008377::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008382::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008383::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008390::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008391::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008392::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008393::PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of mead acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008394::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008395::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008397::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008398::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008399::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008400::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008401::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008402::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008403::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008404::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008406::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0011201::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008407::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008408::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008409::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of two chains of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The homo-g-linolenic acid moieties are derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid.| PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008414::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008415::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008422::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008423::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008424::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008425::PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008426::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008429::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008430::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008431::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008432::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008433::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008434::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008438::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008439::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008440::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008446::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008447::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008455::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008456::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008457::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008458::PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008459::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008462::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008463::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008464::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008465::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008466::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008467::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008471::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008472::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008473::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008479::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008480::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008488::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008489::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008490::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008491::PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008495::PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008496::PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008497::PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008498::PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008499::PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008504::PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008505::PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008512::PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008521::PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008522::PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008523::PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008524::PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008525::PC(22:0/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:0/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of behenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008526::PC(22:0/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:0/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of behenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008528::PC(22:0/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:0/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of behenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008533::PC(22:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of behenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008534::PC(22:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of behenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008535::PC(22:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of behenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008536::PC(22:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of behenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008537::PC(22:0/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:0/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of behenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008538::PC(22:0/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:0/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of behenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008539::PC(22:0/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:0/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of behenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008542::PC(22:0/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:0/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of behenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008543::PC(22:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of behenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008544::PC(22:0/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:0/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of behenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008554::PC(22:0/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:0/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of behenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008558::PC(22:1(13Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008559::PC(22:1(13Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0011202::PC(22:1(13Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008564::PC(22:1(13Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008565::PC(22:1(13Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008566::PC(22:1(13Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008567::PC(22:1(13Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008568::PC(22:1(13Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008569::PC(22:1(13Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008570::PC(22:1(13Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008572::PC(22:1(13Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008573::PC(22:1(13Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008574::PC(22:1(13Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008575::PC(22:1(13Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008588::PC(22:1(13Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008589::PC(22:1(13Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:1(13Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of erucic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008590::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008594::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008595::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008596::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008597::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008598::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008599::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008600::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008601::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008602::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008604::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008605::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008606::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008620::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008621::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008622::PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:2(13Z,16Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008623::PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of adrenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008624::PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of adrenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008626::PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of adrenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008627::PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of adrenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008628::PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of adrenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008629::PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of adrenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008630::PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of adrenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008631::PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of adrenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008635::PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of adrenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008636::PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of adrenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008652::PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of adrenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008653::PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of adrenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008654::PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of adrenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008655::PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of adrenic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008656::PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008657::PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008659::PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008660::PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008661::PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008662::PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008663::PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008668::PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008685::PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008686::PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008687::PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008688::PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008689::PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008690::PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008692::PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008693::PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008694::PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008695::PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008696::PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008701::PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008718::PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008719::PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008720::PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008721::PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008722::PC(22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosahexaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The docosahexaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008725::PC(22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosahexaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The docosahexaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008727::PC(22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosahexaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The docosahexaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008751::PC(22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosahexaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The docosahexaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008752::PC(22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of docosahexaenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The docosahexaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008755::PC(24:0/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:0/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008760::PC(24:0/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:0/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008761::PC(24:0/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:0/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008762::PC(24:0/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:0/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008763::PC(24:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008766::PC(24:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008785::PC(24:0/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:0/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008786::PC(24:0/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:0/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008787::PC(24:0/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:0/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008792::PC(24:1(15Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:1(15Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of nervonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008793::PC(24:1(15Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:1(15Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of nervonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008794::PC(24:1(15Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:1(15Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of nervonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008795::PC(24:1(15Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:1(15Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of nervonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008797::PC(24:1(15Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:1(15Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of nervonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008798::PC(24:1(15Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:1(15Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of nervonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008799::PC(24:1(15Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:1(15Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of nervonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0008818::PC(24:1(15Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:1(15Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of nervonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008819::PC(24:1(15Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:1(15Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of nervonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0008820::PC(24:1(15Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(24:1(15Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of nervonic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0013410::PC(o-16:1(9Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-16:1(9Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Palmitoleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The Palmitoleyl alcohol moiety is derived from whale oil, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013417::PC(o-18:0/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:0/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Stearyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The Stearyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, fish oil, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013419::PC(o-18:0/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:0/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Stearyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The Stearyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, fish oil, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013427::PC(o-18:1(9Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:1(9Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of Oleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The Oleyl alcohol moiety is derived from beef fat, fish oil, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013435::PC(o-18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-18:2(9Z,12Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Linoleyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The Linoleyl alcohol moiety is derived from seed oils, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013439::PC(o-20:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-20:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Arachidyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The Arachidyl alcohol moiety is derived from corn oil, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013445::PC(o-22:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-22:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Behenyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The Behenyl alcohol moiety is derived from Rice bran, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013447::PC(o-22:0/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-22:0/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Behenyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The Behenyl alcohol moiety is derived from Rice bran, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013448::PC(o-22:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-22:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Behenyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The Behenyl alcohol moiety is derived from Rice bran, while the eicosatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013452::PC(o-22:1(13Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-22:1(13Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Erucyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The Erucyl alcohol moiety is derived from Rapeseed oil, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013454::PC(o-22:2(13Z,16Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-22:2(13Z,16Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Docosadienyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The Docosadienyl alcohol moiety is derived from animal fat, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013455::PC(o-22:2(13Z,16Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-22:2(13Z,16Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Docosadienyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The Docosadienyl alcohol moiety is derived from animal fat, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013457::PC(o-22:3(10Z,13Z,16Z)/22:3(10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-22:3(10Z,13Z,16Z)/22:3(10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of 10Z,13Z,16Z-Docosatrienyl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of (10Z,13Z,16Z-docosatrienoyl) at the C-2 position. The 10Z,13Z,16Z-Docosatrienyl alcohol moiety is derived from fish oil, while the (10Z,13Z,16Z-docosatrienoyl) moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013459::PC(o-24:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-24:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Lignoceryl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The Lignoceryl alcohol moiety is derived from plant waxes and beeswax, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013460::PC(o-24:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(o-24:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of Lignoceryl alcohol at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The Lignoceryl alcohol moiety is derived from plant waxes and beeswax, while the eicosatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0011203::PC(P-16:0/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011206::PC(P-16:0/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011207::PC(P-16:0/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011209::PC(P-16:0/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011210::PC(P-16:0/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011211::PC(P-16:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011212::PC(P-16:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011213::PC(P-16:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011214::PC(P-16:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils of hemp, blackcurrant and echium, and the cyanobacterium spirulina. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.| Phosphatidylcholines are a class of phospholipids which incorporate choline as a headgroup. They are a major component of biological membranes and can be isolated from either egg yolk (in Greek lekithos) or soy beans from which they are mechanically extracted or chemically extracted using hexane. Phosphatidylcholines are such a major component of lecithin, that, in some contexts, the terms are sometime used as synonyms. However, lecithin extract consists of a mixture of phosphatidylcholine and other compounds. It is also used along with sodium taurocholate for simulating fed- and fasted-state biorelevant media in dissolution studies of highly-lipophilic drugs.| Phosphatidylcholine is a major constituent of cell membranes, and also plays a role in membrane-mediated cell signalling. Phospholipase D catalyzes the hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine to form phosphatidic acid (PA), releasing the soluble choline headgroup into the cytosol. Some medical researchers are experimenting with using Phosphatidylcholine in a type of injection that will break down fat cells; to be used as an alternative to liposuction known as Injection lipolysis. (Wikipedia). While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens.| Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011215::PC(P-16:0/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011216::PC(P-16:0/20:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/20:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the eicosenoic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils and cod oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011217::PC(P-16:0/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011218::PC(P-16:0/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011219::PC(P-16:0/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011221::PC(P-16:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011223::PC(P-16:0/22:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/22:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of behenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the behenic acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011226::PC(P-16:0/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of adrenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011227::PC(P-16:0/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011229::PC(P-16:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of docosahexaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the docosahexaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011232::PC(P-16:0/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/P-16:0), in particular, consists of two chains of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The plasmalogen 16:0 moieties are derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.|
HMDB0011234::PC(P-16:0/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.|
HMDB0011235::PC(P-16:0/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-16:0/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.|
HMDB0011236::PC(P-18:0/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011237::PC(P-18:0/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011240::PC(P-18:0/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011241::PC(P-18:0/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011242::PC(P-18:0/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011243::PC(P-18:0/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011244::PC(P-18:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011245::PC(P-18:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011246::PC(P-18:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011247::PC(P-18:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011248::PC(P-18:0/20:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/20:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the arachidic acid moiety is derived from peanut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011251::PC(P-18:0/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011252::PC(P-18:0/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011253::PC(P-18:0/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011254::PC(P-18:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011255::PC(P-18:0/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011258::PC(P-18:0/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011259::PC(P-18:0/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of adrenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011260::PC(P-18:0/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011261::PC(P-18:0/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011262::PC(P-18:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of docosahexaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the docosahexaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011263::PC(P-18:0/24:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/24:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011264::PC(P-18:0/24:1(15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/24:1(15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of nervonic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011267::PC(P-18:0/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.|
HMDB0011268::PC(P-18:0/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:0/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.|
HMDB0011269::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011270::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011272::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011273::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011274::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011275::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011276::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011277::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011278::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011279::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011280::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011283::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011284::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011285::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011286::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011287::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011288::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011290::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011291::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011292::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of adrenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011293::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011294::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011296::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/24:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/24:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011297::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/24:1(15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/24:1(15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of nervonic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011298::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.|
HMDB0011299::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.|
HMDB0011300::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of two chains of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moieties are derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.|
HMDB0011301::PC(P-18:1(11Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(11Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.|
HMDB0011302::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/14:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/14:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of myristic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011303::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011305::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the palmitic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, milk fats, vegetable oils and animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011306::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/16:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/16:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011307::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of stearic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the stearic acid moiety is derived from animal fats, coco butter and sesame oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011308::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011309::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of oleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the oleic acid moiety is derived from vegetable oils, especially olive and canola oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011310::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/18:2(9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of linoleic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the linoleic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011311::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/18:3(6Z,9Z,12Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011312::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/18:3(9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of a-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the a-linolenic acid moiety is derived from seed oils, especially canola and soybean oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011313::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/18:4(6Z,9Z,12Z,15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of stearidonic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the stearidonic acid moiety is derived from seed oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011316::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/20:2(11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the eicosadienoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils and liver. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011317::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/20:3(5Z,8Z,11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of mead acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the mead acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011318::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/20:3(8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of homo-g-linolenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the homo-g-linolenic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011319::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/20:4(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of arachidonic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the arachidonic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and eggs. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011320::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011321::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/20:5(5Z,8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of eicosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the eicosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011323::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/22:1(13Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/22:1(13Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of erucic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the erucic acid moiety is derived from seed oils and avocados. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011324::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/22:2(13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of docosadienoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the docosadienoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011325::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/22:4(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of adrenic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the adrenic acid moiety is derived from animal fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011326::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/22:5(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and brain. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011327::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/22:5(7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of docosapentaenoic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the docosapentaenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011329::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/24:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/24:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of lignoceric acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the lignoceric acid moiety is derived from groundnut oil. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011330::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/24:1(15Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/24:1(15Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of nervonic acid at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the nervonic acid moiety is derived from fish oils. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling. While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes.| PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC. Plasmalogens are glycerol ether phospholipids. They are of two types, alkyl ether (-O-CH2-) and alkenyl ether (-O-CH=CH-). Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) serves as the glycerol precursor for the synthesis of plasmalogens. Three major classes of plasmalogens have been identified: choline, ethanolamine and serine derivatives. Ethanolamine plasmalogen is prevalent in myelin. Choline plasmalogen is abundant in cardiac tissue. Usually, the highest proportion of the plasmalogen form is in the ethanolamine class with rather less in choline, and commonly little or none in other phospholipids such as phosphatidylinositol. In choline plasmalogens of most tissues, a higher proportion is often of the O-alkyl rather than the O-alkenyl form, but the reverse tends to be true in heart lipids. In animal tissues, the alkyl and alkenyl moieties in both non-polar and phospholipids tend to be rather simple in composition with 16:0, 18:0 and 18:1 (double bond in position 9) predominating. Ether analogues of triacylglycerols, i.e. 1-alkyldiacyl-sn-glycerols, are present at trace levels only if at all in most animal tissues, but they can be major components of some marine lipids.|
HMDB0011331::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/P-16:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/P-16:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 16:0 at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 16:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.|
HMDB0011332::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/P-18:0) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/P-18:0), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:0 at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:0 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.|
HMDB0011333::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/P-18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/P-18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 position and one chain of plasmalogen 18:1n7 at the C-2 position. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney, while the plasmalogen 18:1n7 moiety is derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.|
HMDB0011334::PC(P-18:1(9Z)/P-18:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(P-18:1(9Z)/P-18:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of two chains of plasmalogen 18:1n9 at the C-1 and C-2 positions. The plasmalogen 18:1n9 moieties are derived from animal fats, liver and kidney. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.|
HMDB0013205::9-decenoylcarnitine is classified as a member of the acyl carnitines. Acyl carnitines are organic compounds containing a fatty acid with the carboxylic acid attached to carnitine through an ester bond. 9-decenoylcarnitine is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. 9-decenoylcarnitine is a fatty ester lipid molecule. 9-decenoylcarnitine can be found in Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin A + D added, 0% fats, Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin A + D added, 1% fats, Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin A + D added, 2% fats, and Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin D added, 3.25% fats. 9-decenoylcarnitine can be found in blood and urine. Within a cell, 9-decenoylcarnitine is primarily located in the extracellular space and near the membrane.|
HMDB0013330::3-Hydroxy-9Z-octadecenoylcarnitine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as beta hydroxy acids and derivatives. Beta hydroxy acids and derivatives are compounds containing a carboxylic acid substituted with a hydroxyl group on the C3 carbon atom. 3-Hydroxy-9Z-octadecenoylcarnitine is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule.|
HMDB0006461::Linoelaidyl carnitine is an acylcarnitine. Numerous disorders have been described that lead to disturbances in energy production and in intermediary metabolism in the organism which are characterized by the production and excretion of unusual acylcarnitines. A mutation in the gene coding for carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase or the OCTN2 transporter aetiologically causes a carnitine deficiency that results in poor intestinal absorption of dietary L-carnitine, its impaired reabsorption by the kidney and, consequently, in increased urinary loss of L-carnitine. Determination of the qualitative pattern of acylcarnitines can be of diagnostic and therapeutic importance. The betaine structure of carnitine requires special analytical procedures for recording. The ionic nature of L-carnitine causes a high water solubility which decreases with increasing chain length of the ester group in the acylcarnitines. Therefore, the distribution of L-carnitine and acylcarnitines in various organs is defined by their function and their physico-chemical properties as well. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) permits screening for free and total carnitine, as well as complete quantitative acylcarnitine determination, including the long-chain acylcarnitine profile. (PMID: 17508264  , Monatshefte fuer Chemie (2005), 136(8), 1279-1291., Int J Mass Spectrom. 1999;188:39-52.).|
HMDB0013132::Hydroxyvalerylcarnitine is classified as a member of the fatty acids and conjugates. Fatty acids and conjugates are aliphatic monocarboxylic acids with a saturated or unsaturated aliphatic tail (with at least 4 Carbon atoms). Hydroxyvalerylcarnitine is considered to be a slightly soluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. Hydroxyvalerylcarnitine can be found in Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin A + D added, 0% fats, Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin A + D added, 1% fats, Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin A + D added, 2% fats, and Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin D added, 3.25% fats. Hydroxyvalerylcarnitine can be found in blood.|
HMDB0013328::Pimelylcarnitine, also known as Heptanedioylcarnitine, is classified as a tricarboxylic acid or a Tricarboxylic acid derivative. Tricarboxylic acids are carboxylic acids containing exactly three carboxyl groups. Pimelylcarnitine is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. Pimelylcarnitine can be found in blood and urine.|
HMDB0013288::Nonanoylcarnitine, also known as 3-(Nonanoyloxy)-4-(trimethylammonio)butanoate, is classified as a member of the acyl carnitines. Acyl carnitines are organic compounds containing a fatty acid with the carboxylic acid attached to carnitine through an ester bond. Nonanoylcarnitine is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. Nonanoylcarnitine is a fatty ester lipid molecule. Nonanoylcarnitine can be found in blood and urine. Within a cell, Nonanoylcarnitine is primarily located in the extracellular space and near the membrane.|
HMDB0007999::PC(16:1(9Z)/14:1(9Z)) is a phosphatidylcholine (PC or GPCho). It is a glycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. As is the case with diacylglycerols, glycerophosphocholines can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PC(16:1(9Z)/14:1(9Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of palmitoleic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of myristoleic acid at the C-2 position. The palmitoleic acid moiety is derived from animal fats and vegetable oils, while the myristoleic acid moiety is derived from milk fats. Phospholipids, are ubiquitous in nature and are key components of the lipid bilayer of cells, as well as being involved in metabolism and signaling.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. |PCs can be synthesized via three different routes. In one route, choline is activated first by phosphorylation and then by coupling to CDP prior to attachment to phosphatidic acid. PCs can also synthesized by the addition of choline to CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol. A third route to PC synthesis involves the conversion of either PS or PE to PC.|
HMDB0013125::Hydroxypropionylcarnitine is classified as a member of the acyl carnitines. Acyl carnitines are organic compounds containing a fatty acid with the carboxylic acid attached to carnitine through an ester bond. Hydroxypropionylcarnitine is considered to be a slightly soluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. Hydroxypropionylcarnitine is a fatty ester lipid molecule. Hydroxypropionylcarnitine can be found in blood, cerebrospinal fluid (csf) or urine. Within a cell, Hydroxypropionylcarnitine is primarily located in the extracellular space and near the membrane.|
HMDB0013161:: 2-hexenoylcarnitine is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and a weak acidic compound. 2-hexenoylcarnitine is a fatty ester lipid molecule. 2-hexenoylcarnitine can be found in Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin A + D added, 0% fats, Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin A + D added, 1% fats, Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin A + D added, 2% fats, and Cow milk, pasteurized, vitamin D added, 3.25% fats. 2-hexenoylcarnitine can be found in blood and urine. Within a cell, 2-hexenoylcarnitine is primarily located in the extracellular space and near the membrane. This compound belongs to the class of chemical entities known as acyl carnitines. These are organic compounds containing a fatty acid with the carboxylic acid attached to carnitine through an ester bond.|
HMDB0012173::4Alpha-hydroxymethyl-5alpha-cholesta-8-en-3beta-ol is a 3-beta-hydroxysterol that is an intermediate in cholesterol biosynthesis. It is a substrate for C-4 methyl sterol oxidase (SC4MOL) and can be generated from the enzymatic reduction of 4a-formyl-5a-cholesta-8-en-3b-ol. The sequence of reactions and the types of intermediates in cholesterol biosynthesis may vary. Alternate routes exist because reduction of the carbon 24,25 double bond on the hydrocarbon side chain of the sterol ring structure by sterol delta24-reductase can occur at multiple points in the pathway, giving rise to different intermediates. These intermediates, with or without a double bond in the hydrocarbon side chain, can serve as substrates for the other enzymes in the pathway.|
HMDB0000788::Orotidine is a nucleoside formed by attaching orotic acid to a ribose ring via a β-N1-glycosidic bond. It is found in bacteria, fungi and plants. In humans, orotidine occurs as its 5'-phosphate (orotidylic acid), which is an intermediate in pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthesis (cytidine and uridine) that are found in nucleic acids. Ornitidine itself is not a component of nucleic acid. Large amounts of ornitidine are excreted in the urine of cancer patients treated with 6-azauridine. (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0000600::Galactosylhydroxylysine is released during bone resorption and elevated in subjects with metabolic bone loss. Galactosylhydroxylysine is a sensitive and specific marker of bone resorption. (PMID 10222355  ).|
HMDB0000405::2-Methoxyestradiol (2ME2) is a drug that prevents the formation of new blood vessels that tumours need in order to grow (angiogenesis). It is derived from estrogen, although it binds poorly to known estrogen receptors, and belongs to the family of drugs called angiogenesis inhibitors. It has undergone phase 1 clinical trials against breast cancers. Preclinical models also suggest that 2ME2 could also be effective against inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis. 2ME2 also acts as a vasodilator.|
HMDB0010379::LysoPC(14:0/0:0) is a lysophospholipid (LyP). It is a monoglycerophospholipid in which a phosphorylcholine moiety occupies a glycerol substitution site. Lysophosphatidylcholines can have different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 (sn-1) position. Fatty acids containing 16, 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. LysoPC(14:0/0:0), in particular, consists of one chain of myristic acid at the C-1 position. The myristic acid moiety is derived from nutmeg and butter. Lysophosphatidylcholine is found in small amounts in most tissues. It is formed by hydrolysis of phosphatidylcholine by the enzyme phospholipase A2, as part of the de-acylation/re-acylation cycle that controls its overall molecular species composition. It can also be formed inadvertently during extraction of lipids from tissues if the phospholipase is activated by careless handling. In blood plasma significant amounts of lysophosphatidylcholine are formed by a specific enzyme system, lecithin:cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT), which is secreted from the liver. The enzyme catalyzes the transfer of the fatty acids of position sn-2 of phosphatidylcholine to the free cholesterol in plasma, with formation of cholesterol esters and lysophosphatidylcholine. Lysophospholipids have a role in lipid signaling by acting on lysophospholipid receptors (LPL-R). LPL-R's are members of the G protein-coupled receptor family of integral membrane proteins.|
HMDB0002802::Cortisone is a naturally occurring glucocorticoid. It has been used in replacement therapy for adrenal insufficiency and as an anti-inflammatory agent. Cortisone itself is inactive. It is converted in the liver into the active metabolite cortisol (Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th ed, p726). Cortisone is a corticosteroid hormone released by the adrenal gland in response to stress. One of cortisone's effects on the body, and a potentially harmful side effect when administered clinically, is the suppression of the immune system. This is an explanation for the apparent correlation between high stress and sickness (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0000790::N-Palmitoylsphingosine belongs to the class of organic compounds known as ceramides. These are lipid molecules containing a sphingosine in which the amine group is linked to a fatty acid. N-Palmitoylsphingosine exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. N-Palmitoylsphingosine has been primarily detected in blood. Within the cell, N-palmitoylsphingosine is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP), endosome and intracellular membrane.|
HMDB0011526::LysoPE(22:6(4Z,7Z,10Z,13Z,16Z,19Z)/0:0) is a lysophosphatidylethanolamine or a lysophospholipid. The term 'lysophospholipid' (LPL) refers to any phospholipid that is missing one of its two O-acyl chains. Thus, LPLs have a free alcohol in either the sn-1 or sn-2 position. The prefix 'lyso-' comes from the fact that lysophospholipids were originally found to be hemolytic however it is now used to refer generally to phospholipids missing an acyl chain. LPLs are usually the result of phospholipase A-type enzymatic activity on regular phospholipids such as phosphatidylcholine or phosphatidic acid, although they can also be generated by the acylation of glycerophospholipids or the phosphorylation of monoacylglycerols. Some LPLs serve important signaling functions such as lysophosphatidic acid. Lysophosphatidylethanolamines (LPEs) can function as plant growth regulators with several diverse uses. (LPEs) are approved for outdoor agricultural use to accelerate ripening and improve the quality of fresh produce. They are also approved for indoor use to preserve stored crops and commercial cut flowers. As a breakdown product of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), LPE is present in cells of all organisms.|
HMDB0000413::3-Hydroxydecanedioic acid appears in the urine of children affected with peroxisomal disorders. Peroxisomal biogenesis disorders (PBDs) are characterized by generalized peroxisomal dysfunction due to defective assembly of the organelle and include the Zellweger, neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy and infantile Refsum phenotypes (PMID 10896310  ).|
HMDB0009901::PI(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:1(11Z)) is a phosphatidylinositol. Phosphatidylinositols are important lipids, both as a key membrane constituent and as a participant in essential metabolic processes, both directly and via a number of metabolites. Phosphatidylinositols are acidic (anionic) phospholipids that consist of a phosphatidic acid backbone, linked via the phosphate group to inositol (hexahydroxycyclohexane). Phosphatidylinositols can have many different combinations of fatty acids of varying lengths and saturation attached at the C-1 and C-2 positions. Fatty acids containing 18 and 20 carbons are the most common. PI(20:4(8Z,11Z,14Z,17Z)/18:1(11Z)), in particular, consists of one chain of eicsoatetraenoic acid at the C-1 position and one chain of vaccenic acid at the C-2 position. The eicsoatetraenoic acid moiety is derived from fish oils, while the vaccenic acid moiety is derived from butter fat and animal fat. The inositol group that is part of every phosphatidylinositol lipid is covalently linked to the phosphate group that acts as a bridge to the lipid tail. In most organisms, the stereochemical form of this inositol is myo-D-inositol (with one axial hydroxyl in position 2 with the remainder equatorial), although other forms can be found in certain plant phosphatidylinositols.| Phosphatidylinositol is especially abundant in brain tissue, where it can amount to 10% of the phospholipids, but it is present in all tissues and cell types. There is usually less of it than of phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylserine. In animal tissues, phosphatidylinositol is the primary source of the arachidonic acid required for biosynthesis of eicosanoids, including prostaglandins, via the action of the enzyme phospholipase A2. Phosphatidylinositol can be phosphorylated by a number of different kinases that place the phosphate moiety on positions 4 and 5 of the inositol ring, although position 3 can also be phosphorylated by a specific kinase. Seven different isomers are known, but the most important in both quantitative and biological terms are phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate and phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate. Phosphatidylinositol and the phosphatidylinositol phosphates are the main source of diacylglycerols that serve as signaling molecules, via the action of phospholipase C enzymes.While most phospholipids have a saturated fatty acid on C-1 and an unsaturated fatty acid on C-2 of the glycerol backbone, the fatty acid distribution at the C-1 and C-2 positions of glycerol within phospholipids is continually in flux, owing to phospholipid degradation and the continuous phospholipid remodeling that occurs while these molecules are in membranes. PIs contain almost exclusively stearic acid at carbon 1 and arachidonic acid at carbon 2. PIs composed exclusively of non-phosphorylated inositol exhibit a net charge of -1 at physiological pH. Molecules with phosphorylated inositol (such as PIP, PIP2, PIP3, etc.) are termed polyphosphoinositides. The polyphosphoinositides are important intracellular transducers of signals emanating from the plasma membrane. The synthesis of PI involves CDP-activated 1,2-diacylglycerol condensation with myo-inositol.|
HMDB0004813::3-Methyluridine is a modified nucleoside of cellular RNA. All modifications are formed post-transcriptionally in RNA from the normal nucleosides by modifying enzymes, especially specific RNA-methyltransferases and RNA-synthetases. Due to the lack of specific phosphorylases for modified nucleosides they cannot be recycled for synthesizing RNA, so they are excreted quantitatively in urine. (PMID 15906010  ).|
HMDB0001369::Pyrroline hydroxycarboxylic acid is a metabolite identified in the urine of patients with type II hyperprolinemia. (OMIM 239510  ). The urinary excretion of Pyrroline hydroxycarboxylic acid increased in hyperprolinemic patients but not in healthy controls during oral loading of hydroxyproline and hydroxyproline-ornithine. (PMID: 533224  ). Hyperprolinemia type II (HP II) is a rare inherited metabolic disease due to the deficiency of pyroline-5-carboxylate dehydrogenase. It is generally believed to be a benign condition although some patients have neurological problems such as refractory convulsions. (PMID: 15214748  ). The oxidation of pyrroline-carboxylate generates glutamate and pyrroline-hydroxycarboxylate, a reaction catalyzed by hydroxyproline oxidase (PMID: 500817  ).|
HMDB0001475::The action of Zirconium (Zr) on biological systems presents an enigma. It is ubiquitous, being present in nature in amounts higher than most trace elements. It is taken up by plants from soil and water and accumulated in certain tissues. The entry into animal systems in vivo is related to the mode of exposure and the concentration in the surrounding environment. Retention is initially in soft tissues and then slowly in the bone. The metal is able to cross the blood brain-barrier and is deposited in the brain and the placental barrier to enter milk. Physiologically, it exists as an ion in the body. The daily human uptake has been known to be as high as 125 mg. The level of toxicity has been found to be moderately low, both in histological and cytological studies. The toxic effects induced by very high concentrations are nonspecific in nature. Despite the presence and retention in relatively high quantities in biological systems, Zr has not yet been associated with any specific metabolic function. Very little information is available about its interaction with the compounds of the genetical systems, such as nucleic acids. Apparently, the metal is neither an essential nor toxic element in the conventional sense. However, the increasing exposure to this element through its increasing use in new materials and following radioactive fallout, has increased the importance of the study of its effects on living organisms. The tetravalent nature of the ionic state and the high stability of the compounds formed are important factors that need to be considered, as also the accumulation of this element in the brain, reminiscent of the relationship between Aluminum and Alzheimer's disease.| Zirconium is a metallic element with the atomic number 40 and mol wt 91.99, and belongs to the group IVB and second transition series of the fifth period of Mendeleyev's periodic table. It was named from Arabic zargun, meaning gold color. Discovered in the semiprecious gem zircon, as orthosilicate, by Klaproth in 1789, Zr was isolated as an element by Berzelius in 1824. In its metal form, Zr is hard and resistant to corrosion, heat, and acid. Zirconium behaves like an essential trace metal in the biosphere, although the possibility that it is a natural contaminant with no considerable physiological effects must be considered (PMID: 1283692  , Biol Trace Elem Res. 1992 Dec;35(3):247-71.).|
HMDB0012162::4-Methoxytyramine is a catecholamine derivative. Catecholamines are important components of the central nervous system. A number of diseases are characterized by abnormal levels of catecholamines. For example, patients with Parkinson's disease have lower levels of dopamine than normal. L-3,4-Dihydroxyphennylalanune (L-Dopa), a catechol a-amino acid, is widely used in the treatment of Parkinson's disease. When L-Dopa is given orally to patients, the most prominent metabolite is 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylalanine. However, a part of L-Dopa is methylated to 3-hydroxy-4-methylphenylalanine and to 3-hydroxy-4-methoxyphenethylamine. It has been reported that 4-O-methylation of catecholamines is implicated in some neuropsychiatric disorders and thus 3-hydroxy-4-methoxyphenethylamine appears to be the endogenous "toxin" in Parkinson's disease. Consequently, the determination of plasma levels of 3-hydroxy-4-methoxyphenethylamine is important following oral L-Dopa therapy (PMID: 6518609  ).|
HMDB0003626::1(R),2(N)-dimethyl-6,7-dihydroxy-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline [N-methyl-(R)salsolinol, NM(R)Sal] is the most potent toxin among isoquinolines. Endogenous isoquinolines with and without catechol structure have been proposed to be neurotoxins specific for dopamine neurons. (PMID 9085193  ). (R)salsolinol N-methyltransferase synthesizes N-methyl(R)salsolinol, which is further oxidized into 1,2-dimethyl-6,7-dihydroxyisoquinolinium ion by non-enzymatic and enzymatic oxidation. (PMID 14697894  ). Dopamine-derived N-methyl(R)salsolinol is an endogenous MPTP-like neurotoxin to cause Parkinson's disease. In the cerebrospinal fluid from newly diagnosed untreated patients with Parkinson's disease, the level of this toxin was found to increase significantly, compared to control and a disease control, multiple system atrophy. L-DOPA therapy did not seem to affect the level of this toxin. The results suggest that N-methyl(R)salsolinol level in the cerebrospinal fluid may indicate remaining dopamine neurons in the parkinsonian brain. (PMID 10076861  ). N-methyl(R)salsolinol (NM(R)Sal) induces apoptosis (but not necrosis) in SH-SY5Y cells, and the apoptotic cascade is initiated by mitochondrial permeability transition and activated by stepwise reactions. (PMID 12200198  ).|
HMDB0004087::1-benzyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline (1BnTIQ) as a possible PD-eliciting neurotoxin and evaluated its characteristics relevant to Parkinson disease (PD). 1BnTIQ exist in mammals and is proposed as possible PD-eliciting neurotoxin. PD is believed to be induced by the interaction of genetic predisposition and environmental factors, and a type of neurotoxin is proposed to be one of the environmental factors. 1BnTIQ inhibits [3H] dopamine uptake in HEK293 cells which stably express dopamine transporter. 1BnTIQ also inhibits NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) in the mitochondrial respiratory chain. 1BnTIQ decreases the dopamine content in the mesencephalon in both dose- and time-dependent manners and it irreversibly reduced the dopamine content. Furthermore, it causes morphological changes in tyrosine hydroxylase-positive cells in the mesencephalon and reduced the number of cells. (PMID 12440154  ).|
HMDB0001189::2(N)-methyl-norsalsolinol (NMNorsal) is a dihydroxylated tetrahydroisoquinoline derivative 2(N)-analogue of salsolinol, identified as a putative endogenous neurotoxin in patients with Parkinson's disease. A prominent blood-brain barrier (BBB) is described to exist for salsolinol, but penetration of NMNorsal occurs through the BBB into the caudate nucleus of the rat brain. There was no alteration in extracellular dopamine or 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid levels. (PMID 11924888  ). 2(N)-methyl-norsalsolinol was identified in L-DOPA-treated patients with Parkinson's disease and proposed to be responsible for behavioral changes. Atypical heterocyclic L-DOPA/dopamine metabolite NMNorsal is able to modify long-term regulation of serotonin and opioid receptor expression in striatum. Since the occurrence of hallucinosis or psychosis following L-DOPA treatment is related to the serotonergic system, these results probably reflect a link between NMNorsal and L-DOPA side effects in Parkinson's disease. (PMID 14607311  ).|
HMDB0001855::5-Hydroxytryptophol is a relatively minor metabolite of serotonin that is excreted primarily as the glucuronide conjugate in human urine. 5-Hydroxytryptophol becomes more important quantitatively during alcohol intoxication, when a shift in the metabolism of serotonin occurs from 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid toward increased (15-fold higher) formation of 5-hydroxytryptophol due to the inhibition of aldehyde dehydrogenase by ethanol-derived acetaldehyde. Urinary excretion of 5-hydroxytryptophol has also been shown to be markedly increased for several hours following intake of foods rich in serotonin, such as bananas. Wide interspecies variation has been reported in the metabolism serotonin to 5-hydroxytryptophol; 5-Hydroxytryptophol makes up 35% of the excreted serotonin metabolites in the rat on average and 10 to 20% in several other species. Human UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A6 (UGT1A6) plays a predominant role in the glucuronidation of 5-hydroxytryptophol by human liver microsomes. (PMID 15258112  ).|
HMDB0000333::Isohomovanillic acid is a deaminated metabolite of catecholamines formed by the enzyme catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT; EC 2.1.1.6) which catalyzes the transfer of a methyl group from S-adenosylmethionine to catecholamines, including the neurotransmitters dopamine, epinephrine, and norepinephrine. This O-methylation results in one of the major degradative pathways of the catecholamine transmitters. (OMIM 116790  ).|
HMDB0006111::12-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (12-HETE) is an eicosanoid, a 5-lipoxygenase metabolite of arachidonic acid. 5-Lipoxygenase (LO)-derived leukotrienes are involved in inflammatory glomerular injury. LO product 12-HETE is associated with pathogenesis of hypertension, and may mediate angiotensin II and TGFbeta induced mesengial cell abnormality in diabetic nephropathy. 12-HETE is markedly elevated in the psoriatic lesions. 12-HETE is a vasoconstrictor eicosanoid that contribute to high blood pressure in (renovascular) hypertension and pregnancy-induced hypertension. A significant percentage of patients suffering from a selective increase in plasma LDL cholesterol (type IIa hyperlipoproteinaemia) exhibits increased platelet reactivity. This includes enhanced platelet responsiveness against a variety of platelet-stimulating agents ex vivo and enhanced arachidonic acid metabolism associated with increased generation of arachidonic acid metabolites such as 12-HETE, and secretion of platelet-storage products (PMID: 7562532  , 12480795  , 17361113  , 8498970  ,1333255  , 2119633  ). 12-HETE is a highly selective ligand used to label mu-opioid receptors in both membranes and tissue sections. The 12-s-HETE analog has been reported to augment tumour cell metastatic potential through activation of protein kinase c. 12-HETE can be formed either in the 12-S or 12-R configuration. It has a diversity of biological actions and is generated by a number of tissues including the renal glomerulus and the vasculature. 12-HETE is one of the six monohydroxy fatty acids produced by the non-enzymatic oxidation of arachidonic acid. 12-HETE is a neuromodulator that is synthesized during ischemia. Its neuronal effects include attenuation of calcium influx and glutamate release as well as inhibition of AMPA receptor (AMPA-R) activation. 12-HETE is found to be associated with peroxisomal biogenesis defect and Zellweger syndrome, which are inborn errors of metabolism.|
HMDB0003876::15(S)-HETE is a hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid. Hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids (HETEs) are formed by the 5-, 12- and 15-lipoxygenase (LO) pathways. 5- and 12-LO products are mainly proinflammatory in the skin whereas the main 15-LO product 15-HETE has antiinflammatory capacities. In vitro 15-HETE has been shown to inhibit LTB4 formation, 12-HETE formation and specifically inhibits the neutrophil chemotactic effect of LTB4. The inhibition of LTB4 formation is probably due to modulation of the 5-LO because no changes in PGE2 formation have been determined. In vivo, 15-HETE inhibits LTB4-induced erythema and edema, and reduces LTB4 in the synovial fluid of carragheenan-induced experimental arthritis in dogs. 15-HETE has also some immunomodulatory effects. It inhibits the mixed lymphocyte reaction, induces generation of murine cytotoxic suppressor T cells, and it decreases interferon production by murine lymphoma cells. Furthermore, IL-4 and IL-13 have recently been shown to be potent activators of the 15-LO in mononuclear cells (PMID: 11104340  ). 15(S)-HETE is found to be associated with Zellweger syndrome, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000078::Cysteinylglycine is a naturally occurring dipeptide. It is derived from the breakdown of glutathione (a tripeptide). In plasma, cysteinylglycine is in a reduced, oxidized and protein-bound form (aminothiol) and interact via redox and disulphide exchange reactions, in a dynamic system referred to as redox thiol status (PMID 8642471  ). Spermatozoa of sub fertile men contain significantly higher thiol concentrations as compared with those of fertile men. The detrimental effect on embryo quality of a high homocysteine (Hcy, another member of the thiol group) concentration in the ejaculate and in follicular fluid is intriguing and may suggest that Hcy is inversely associated with fertility outcome (PMID 16556671  ). Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disease which involves the synovial membrane of multiple diarthroidal joints causing damage to cartilage and bones. The damage process seems to be related to an overproduction of oxygen reactive species inducing an oxidative perturbation with an increase in some oxidized forms (disulfides and protein mixed disulfides) and a decrease in free thiols (PMID 15895891  ). Imipenem (thienamycin formamidine), is a broad-spectrum beta-lactam antibiotic, always used in combination with cilastatin in order to avoid the premature breakdown of imipenem by renal tubular dipeptidase. As this dipeptidase also hydrolyzes the glutathione metabolite cysteinylglycine, the therapeutic association of imipenem and cilastatin causes plasma levels of cysteinylglycine to increase significantly, while cysteine levels are decreased and homocysteine levels are unaffected. Therefore, antibiotic treatment using imipenem-cilastatin induces important metabolic changes that should not remain unrecognized (PMID 15843241  ). Moreover, cysteinylglycine is found to be associated with phenylketonuria, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000205::Phenylpyruvic acid is a keto-acid that is an intermediate or catabolic byproduct of phenylalanine metabolism. It has a slight honey-like odor. Levels of phenylpyruvate are normally very low in blood or urine. High levels of phenylpyruvic acid can be found in the urine of individuals with phenylketonuria (PKU), an inborn error of metabolism. PKU is due to lack of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), so that phenylalanine is converted not to tyrosine but to phenylpyruvic acid. In particular, excessive phenylalanine can be metabolized into phenylketones through, a transaminase pathway route involving glutamate. Metabolites of this transamination reaction include phenylacetate, phenylpyruvate and phenethylamine. In persons with PKU, dietary phenylalanine either accumulates in the body or some of it is converted to phenylpyruvic acid. Individuals with PKU tend to excrete large quantities of phenylpyruvate, phenylacetate and phenyllactate, along with phenylalanine, in their urine. If untreated, mental retardation effects and microcephaly are evident by the first year along with other symptoms which include: unusual irritability, epileptic seizures and skin lesions. Hyperactivity, EEG abnormalities and seizures, and severe learning disabilities are major clinical problems later in life. A "musty or mousy" odor of skin, hair, sweat and urine (due to phenylacetate accumulation); and a tendency to hypopigmentation and eczema are also observed. The neural-development effects of PKU are primarily due to the disruption of neurotransmitter synthesis. In particular, phenylalanine is a large, neutral amino acid which moves across the blood-brain barrier (BBB) via the large neutral amino acid transporter (LNAAT). Excessive phenylalanine in the blood saturates the transporter. Thus, excessive levels of phenylalanine significantly decrease the levels of other LNAAs in the brain. But since these amino acids are required for protein and neurotransmitter synthesis, phenylalanine accumulation disrupts brain development, leading to mental retardation.|
HMDB0062175::N-lactoyl-Phenylalanine is lactoyl derivative of phenylalanine. N-lactoyl-amino acids are ubiquitous pseudodipeptides of lactic acid and amino acids that are rapidly formed by reverse proteolysis. A protease, cytosolic nonspecific dipeptidase 2 (CNDP2), catalyzes their formation. The plasma levels of these metabolites strongly correlate with plasma levels of lactate and amino acid. (PMID: 25964343  )|
HMDB0062595::Meta-hydroxyphenylhydracrylic acid belongs to the class of organic compounds known as beta hydroxy acids and derivatives. Beta hydroxy acids and derivatives are compounds containing a carboxylic acid substituted with a hydroxyl group on the C3 carbon atom. Meta-hydroxyphenylhydracrylic acid can be biosynthesized from propionic acid. |
HMDB0004063::Metanephrine is a metabolite of epinephrine created by action of catechol O-methyltransferase on epinephrine. Technically it is a product of epinephrine O-methylation. It is a commonly occurring, pharmacologically and physiologically inactive metabolite of epinephrine. The measurement of plasma free metanephrines is considered to be the best tool in the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma, a rare kind of adrenal medullary neoplasm. In adrenal chromaffin cells, leakage of norepinephrine and epinephrine from storage granules leads to substantial intracellular production of the O-methylated metabolite metanephrine. In fact, the adrenals constitute the single largest source out of any organ system including the liver for circulating metanephrine. In humans, about 93 percent of circulating metanephrine is derived from catecholamines metabolized within adrenal chromaffin cells. (PMID 15317907  ).|
HMDB0002865::Oxytocin is a mammalian hormone that also acts as a neurotransmitter in the brain. In women, it is released mainly after distention of the cervix and vagina during labor, and after stimulation of the nipples, facilitating birth and breastfeeding, respectively. Oxytocin is released during orgasm in both sexes. In the brain, oxytocin is involved in social recognition and bonding, and might be involved in the formation of trust between people. -- Wikipedia; In the pituitary gland, oxytocin is packaged in large, dense-core vesicles, where it is bound to neurophysin as shown in the inset of the figure; neurophysin is a large peptide fragment of the giant precursor protein molecule from which oxytocin is derived by enzymatic cleavage. -- Wikipedia; Oxytocin is a peptide of nine amino acids (a nonapeptide). The sequence is cysteine - tyrosine - isoleucine - glutamine - asparagine - cysteine - proline - leucine - glycine (CYIQNCPLG). The cysteine residues form a sulfur bridge. Oxytocin has a molecular mass of 1007 daltons. One international unit (IU) of oxytocin is the equivalent of about 2 micrograms of pure peptide. -- Wikipedia; Oxytocin has peripheral (hormonal) actions, and also has actions in the brain. The actions of oxytocin are mediated by specific, high affinity oxytocin receptors. The oxytocin receptor is a G-protein-coupled receptor which requires Mg2+ and cholesterol. It belongs to the rhodopsin-type (class I) group of G-protein-coupled receptors. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0005047::Conjugated linoleic acid is an integral term for the mixture of positional and geometrical isomers of the octadecadienoic acids, whose two double-bonds are separated with one single-bond. The most common isomers are cis-9, trans-11, and trans-10, cis-12. Conjugated linoleic acid is present in the food namely in the red meat and dairy products which the contemporary dietary recommendations tend to limit. Those limitations should be compensated with dietary supplements. Much attention has focused on the therapeutic potential of conjugated linoleic acid. Initial animal studies associated conjugated linoleic acid with beneficial health properties, such as reducing the risk of cancer, diabetes, atherosclerosis, inflammation and obesity. More recent human conjugated linoleic acid supplementation studies have often shown conflicting and less convincing health benefits. The marked variation between studies may reflect the isomer-specific effect of the individual conjugated linoleic acid isomers, which can often have opposing effects. Detrimental effects have been observed in some studies, in particular after supplementation with the trans-10,cis-12 conjugated linoleic acid isomer. Diet composition may modulate CLA effects on body fat accumulation. As far as human studies are concerned, a specific dietary pattern has not been established. As a result differences among studies and also among subjects in the same study are likely. In rodents, the effects of CLA vary with genotype, suggesting that genetic predisposition to fat accumulation can play an important role in the effectiveness of CLA. Human volunteers with different body mass index have participated in the published studies and even in the same experiment. So, differences in lipid metabolism among subjects could help to explain the discrepancies observed in the literature. Age and maturity may also be crucial. (PMID: 17053429  , 17217167  , 17554969  , 16477173  ).|
HMDB0000733::Hyodeoxycholic acid is a bile acid. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ).|
HMDB0000686::Isoursodeoxycholic acid is a bile acid. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ).|
HMDB0000917::Ursocholic acid is a bile acid. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues. (PMID: 11316487  , 16037564  , 12576301  , 11907135  ). Ursocholic acid is the 7 beta-hydroxyepimer of cholic acid. It induces a reduction of bile cholesterol saturation.|
HMDB0000326::1b,3a,12a-Trihydroxy-5b-cholanoic acid is a bile acid. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depends only on presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH and, consequently, require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g., membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues.|
HMDB0000119::Glyoxylic acid or oxoacetic acid is an organic compound that is both an aldehyde and a carboxylic acid. Glyoxylic acid is a liquid with a melting point of -93°C and a boiling point of 111°C. It is an intermediate of the glyoxylate cycle, which enables certain organisms to convert fatty acids into carbohydrates. The conjugate base of glyoxylic acid is known as glyoxylate (PMID: 16396466  ). In humans, glyoxylate is produced via two pathways: (1) through the oxidation of glycolate in peroxisomes and (2) through the catabolism of hydroxyproline in mitochondria. In the peroxisomes, glyoxylate is converted into glycine by glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT1) or into oxalate by glycolate oxidase. In the mitochondria, glyoxylate is converted into glycine by mitochondrial glyoxylate aminotransferase AGT2 or into glycolate by glycolate reductase. A small amount of glyoxylate is converted into oxalate by cytoplasmic lactate dehydrogenase. Glyoxylic acid is found to be associated with primary hyperoxaluria I, which is an inborn error of metabolism. Under certain circumstances, glyoxylate can be a nephrotoxin and a metabotoxin. A nephrotoxin is a compound that causes damage to the kidney and kidney tissues. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. High levels of glyoxylate are involved in the development of hyperoxaluria, a key cause of nephrolithiasis (commonly known as kidney stones). Glyoxylate is both a substrate and inductor of sulfate anion transporter-1 (SAT-1), a gene responsible for oxalate transportation, allowing it to increase SAT-1 mRNA expression, and as a result oxalate efflux from the cell. The increased oxalate release allows the buildup of calcium oxalate in the urine, and thus the eventual formation of kidney stones. As an aldehyde, glyoxylate is also highly reactive and will modify proteins to form advanced glycation products (AGEs).|
HMDB0000010::2-Methoxyestrone is a steroid derivative that is a byproduct of estrone and 2-hydroxyestrone metabolism. It is part of the androgen and estrogen metabolic pathway. The acid ionization constant (pKa) of 2-methoxyestrone is 10.81 (PMID: 516114  ). 2-Methoxyestrone can be metabolized to a sulfated derivative (2-methoxyestrone 3-sulfate) via steroid sulfotransferase (EC 2.8.2.15). It can also be glucuronidated to 2-methoxyestrone 3-glucuronide by UDP glucuronosyltransferase (EC 2.4.1.17).|
HMDB0001310::Alanine is a nonessential amino acid made in the body from the conversion of the carbohydrate pyruvate or the breakdown of DNA and the dipeptides carnosine and anserine. It is highly concentrated in muscle and is one of the most important amino acids released by muscle, functioning as a major energy source. Plasma alanine is often decreased when the BCAA (Branched Chain Amino Acids) are deficient. This finding may relate to muscle metabolism. Alanine is highly concentrated in meat products and other high-protein foods like wheat germ and cottage cheese. Alanine is an important participant as well as regulator in glucose metabolism. Alanine levels parallel blood sugar levels in both diabetes and hypoglycemia, and alanine reduces both severe hypoglycemia and the ketosis of diabetes. It is an important amino acid for lymphocyte reproduction and immunity. Alanine therapy has helped dissolve kidney stones in experimental animals. Normal alanine metabolism, like that of other amino acids, is highly dependent upon enzymes that contain vitamin B6. Alanine, like GABA, taurine and glycine, is an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. http://www.dcnutrition.com/AminoAcids/).|
HMDB0000531::3-Hydroxyvaleric acid may be products of the condensation of propionyl-CoA with acetyl-CoA catalyzed by 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolases. An increase amount of 3-hydroxyvaleric acid can be found in methylmalonic acidemia and propionic acidemia. (PMID: 630060  ).|
HMDB0000927::Valerylglycine is an acyl glycine. Acyl glycines are normally minor metabolites of fatty acids. However, the excretion of certain acyl glycines is increased in several inborn errors of metabolism. In certain cases the measurement of these metabolites in body fluids can be used to diagnose disorders associated with mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation. Acyl glycines are produced through the action of glycine N-acyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.13) which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction:acyl-CoA + glycine < -- > CoA + N-acylglycineValerylglycine are identified based on their liquid chromatographic-atmospheric pressure chemical ionization mass spectra (LC-APCI-MS)(PMID: 8548022  ).|
HMDB0003966::Selenomethionine is an amino acid containing selenium that cannot be synthesized by higher animals, but can be obtained from plant material. Selenomethionine is the major seleno-compound in cereal grains (wheat grain, maize and rice), soybeans and enriched yeast. Seleno-compounds present in plants may have a profound effect upon the health of animals and human subjects. It is now known that the total Se content cannot be used as an indication of its efficacy, but knowledge of individual selenocompounds is necessary to fully assess the significance. Thus, speciation of the seleno-compounds has moved to the forefront. Since animals and man are dependent upon plants for their nutritional requirements, this makes the types of seleno-compounds in plants even more critical. Se enters the food chain through incorporation into plant proteins, mostly as selenocysteine and selenomethionine at normal Se levels. There are two possible pathways for the catabolism of selenomethionine. One is the transsulfuration pathway via selenocystathionine to produce selenocysteine, which in turn is degraded to H2Se by the enzyme b-lyase. The other pathway is the transamination-decarboxylation pathway. It was estimated that 90% of methionine is metabolized through this pathway and thus could be also the major route for selenomethionine catabolism. (PMID: 14748935  , Br J Nutr. 2004 Jan;91(1):11-28.).|
HMDB0011717::Nonic acid or the anion, nonate, is a derivative of succinic acid, which is a dicarboxylic acid. The anion, succinate, is a component of the citric acid cycle capable of donating electrons to the electron transfer chain. Succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) plays an important role in the mitochondria, being both part of the respiratory chain and the Krebs cycle. SDH with a covalently attached FAD prosthetic group, binds enzyme substrates (succinate and fumarate) and physiological regulators (oxaloacetate and ATP). Oxidizing succinate links SDH to the fast-cycling Krebs cycle portion where it participates in the breakdown of acetyl-CoA throughout the whole Krebs cycle. The succinate can readily be imported into the mitochondrial matrix by the n-butylmalonate- (or phenylsuccinate-) sensitive dicarboxylate carrier in exchange with inorganic phosphate or another organic acid, e. g. malate. (PMID 16143825  ) Mutations in the four genes encoding the subunits of the mitochondrial respiratory chain succinate dehydrogenase are associated with a wide spectrum of clinical presentations (i.e.: Huntington's disease. (PMID 11803021  ).|
HMDB0005831::Sorbitol 6-phosphate (Sor6P) is an intermediate in sorbitol biosynthesis. It is a competitive inhibitor for both cytosolic and chloroplastic PGIs with a K(i) of 61 and 40muM, respectively. PMID: 18242768  .|
HMDB0003466::L-Gulonolactone (also known as reduced ascorbic acid, RAA) is the substrate of the enzyme L-gulono-1,4-lactone oxidoreductase (EC 1.1.3.8), which catalyzes the last step of the biosynthesis of L-ascorbic acid (vitamin C) in plants and animals. The enzyme L-Gulono-1,4-lactone oxidase is missing in scurvy-prone, vitamin C-deficient animals, such as humans. L-Gulonolactone is present in human blood and has been used as one of the markers to compare changes in exercise-induced oxidative stress. (PMID: 16956367  , 16494601  ).|
HMDB0000150::Gluconolactone is a lactone or oxidized derivative of glucose. Gluconolactone is a polyhydroxy acid (PHA) that is capable of chelating metals and may also function by scavenging free radicals, thereby protecting skin from some of the damaging effects of UV radiation. Also used as a pheromone by the oriental cockroach.|
HMDB0011740::D-(+)-Turanose is a reducing disaccharide. Its systematic name is a-D-glucopyranosyl-(1-->3)-a-D-fructofuranose. It is an analog of sucrose not metabolized by higher plants, but rather acquired through the action of sucrose transporters for intracellular carbohydrate signaling. In addition to its involvement in signal transduction, D-(+)-Turanose can also be used as a carbon source by many organisms including numerous species of bacteria and fungi (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0011742::Kojibiose is a disaccharide. It can be found in honey, koji extract, sweet potato starch, sake and beer, and also in polysaccharides and sugar chains of glycoproteins. There are many methods of preparation including the isolation of a partial acetolyzate of dextran from Leuconostoc mecenteroides. However a more effective method with high efficiency was achieved using kojibiose phosphorylase with D-glucose and beta-D-glucose-1-phosphate as substrates. Kojibiose was also found as one of the components of glucose caramel, following thermal degradation.|
HMDB0001926::Ethinyl estradiol. A semisynthetic alkylated estradiol with a 17-alpha-ethinyl substitution. It has high estrogenic potency when administered orally, and is often used as the estrogenic component in oral contraceptives. -- Pubchem; estradiol (17-beta estradiol) (also oestradiol) is a sex hormone. Labelled the "female" hormone but also present in males it represents the major estrogen in humans. Critical for sexual functioning, estradiol also supports bone growth. -- Wikipedia; One of the fascinating twists to mammalian sexual differentiation is that estradiol is one of the two active metabolites of testosterone in males (the other being dihydrotestosterone). estradiol cannot be transferred readily from the circulation into the brain. Since fetuses of both sexes are exposed to similarly high levels of maternal estradiol, it can play little role in prenatal sexual differentiation. However, testosterone enters the central nervous system more freely and significant amounts are aromatized to estradiol within the brain of most male mammals, including humans. There is now much evidence that the programming of adult male sexual behavior in "lower mammals," (such as mounting rather than lordosis behavior), is largely dependent on estradiol produced in the central nervous system during prenatal life and early infancy from testosterone. We do not yet know whether this process plays a minimal or significant part in human sexual behaviors. -- Wikipedia; A synthetic form of estradiol, called ethinyl estradiol is a major component of hormonal contraceptive devices. Combined oral contraceptives contain ethinyl estradiol and a progestin, which both contribute to the inhibition of GnRH, LH, and FSH. The inhibition of these hormones accounts for the ability of combined oral contraceptives or birth control pills to prevent ovulation and thus prevent pregnancy. Other types of hormonal birth control contain only progestins and no ethinyl estradiol. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0000218::Orotidylic acid (OMP), is a pyrimidine nucleotide which is the last intermediate in the biosynthesis of uridine monophosphate. Decarboxylation by Orotidylate decarboxylase affords Uridine 5'-phosphate which is the route to Uridine and its derivatives de novo and consequently one of the most important processes in nucleic acid synthesis (Dictionary of Organic Compounds). In humans, the enzyme UMP synthase converts OMP into uridine 5'- monophosphate. If UMP synthase is defective, orotic aciduria can result. (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0011720::UDP-N-Acetylmuraminate, also known as UDP-N-acetylmuraminic acid or N-acetylmuramoyl-UDP, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as pyrimidine nucleotide sugars. These are pyrimidine nucleotides bound to a saccharide derivative through the terminal phosphate group. UDP-N-Acetylmuraminate is soluble (in water) and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). UDP-N-Acetylmuraminate has been found in human prostate tissue. |
HMDB0001191::Deoxyuridine triphosphate (dUTP) is a deoxynucleotide triphosphate (dNTP) that is chemically similar to uridine triphosphate (UTP) except that it has a deoxyribose sugar instead of a ribose sugar. DNA synthesis requires the availability of deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dTTP, dATP, dGTP, dCTP), whereas RNA synthesis requires the availability of nucleotide triphosphates (NTPs) such as TTP, ATP, GTP, and UTP. The conversion of nucleotide triphosphates (NTPs) into dNTPs can only be done in the diphosphate form. Typically, an NTP has one phosphate removed to become an NDP. This is then converted into a dNDP by an enzyme called ribonucleotide reductase and followed by the re-addition of phosphate to give a dNTP. dUTP is a substrate for several enzymes, including inosine triphosphate pyrophosphatase, deoxyuridine 5'-triphosphate nucleotidohydrolase (mitochondrial), uridine-cytidine kinase 1, nucleoside diphosphate kinase 3, nucleoside diphosphate kinase B, nucleoside diphosphate kinase 6, nucleoside diphosphate kinase (mitochondrial), nucleoside diphosphate kinase homolog 5, nucleoside diphosphate kinase A, and nucleoside diphosphate kinase 7. While UTP is routinely incorporated into RNA, dUTP is not normally incorporated into DNA. Instead, if dUTP is misincorporated into DNA, it can cause DNA damage. Therefore, dUTP can be considered as a teratogen or a mutagen. The extent of DNA damage caused by dUTP is highly dependent on the levels of the dUTP pyrophosphatase (dUTPase) and uracil-DNA glycosylase (UDG), which limits the intracellular accumulation of dUTP. Additionally, loss of viability following thymidylate synthase (TS) inhibition occurs as a consequence of the accumulation of dUTP in some cell lines and subsequent misincorporation of uracil into DNA (PMID: 11487279  ).|
HMDB0003459::The ATP-dependent carboxylate-amine/thiol ligase superfamily is known to contain enzymes catalyzing the formation of various types of peptide, one of which is d-alanyl-d-alanine.(PMID: 16030213  ). The glycopeptide antibiotic vancomycin acts by binding to the D-alanyl-D-alanine terminus of the cell wall precursor lipid II in the cytoplasmic membrane.(PMID: 17418637  ). D-alanine-D-alanine ligase from Thermotoga maritima ATCC 43589 (TmDdl) was a useful biocatalyst for synthesizing D-amino acid dipeptides.D-Alanine-D-alanine ligase (Ddl) catalyzes the biosynthesis of an essential bacterial peptidoglycan precursor D-alanyl-D-alanine and it represents an important target for development of new antibacterial drugs. (PMID: 17267218  ).|
HMDB0004246::Bradykinin is a vasoactive kinin that is liberated from its substrate kininogen by the action of kallikrein, and is known to be involved in a wide range of biologic processes. It may play an important role in blood pressure regulation and the maintenance of normal blood flow. Moreover, in various pathologic states of the cardiovascular system, it appears to provide protective actions against ischemic injury, ventricular hypertrophy, congestive heart failure, and thrombosis. Bradykinin is a potent vasodilator that acts through endothelial B2 kinin receptors to stimulate the release of nitric oxide and endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor. Bradykinin deficiency states may play a role in some forms of hypertension, and a relative deficiency in bradykinin may be a contributing factor to worsening heart failure. Experimental studies revealed that mice lacking the B2 receptor gene were more likely to develop hypertension, cardiac hypertrophy, and myocardial damage. Kinins exert several biologic actions. They are involved in nociception, inflammation, capillary permeability, reactive hyperemia, and stimulation of cellular glucose uptake. Bradykinin is a polypeptide that circulates in the plasma in very low concentrations in comparison with the amount of bradykinin found in various body tissues. Kininogens ([alpha] 2 globulins) are synthesized in the liver and circulate at high concentrations in the plasma. There are two kininogenases that convert kininogens into bradykinin: plasma kallikrein, also known as Fletcher factor, and glandular kallikrein, also known as tissue kallikrein. (PMID: 11975815  ).|
HMDB0003701::Dimethylbenzimidazole is an intermediate in Riboflavin metabolism. Dimethylbenzimidazole is the second to last step for the synthesis of alpha-Ribazole. It is converted from Riboflavin then it is converted to N1-(5-Phospho-alpha-D-ribosyl)-5,6-dimethylbenzimidazole via the enzyme nicotinate-nucleotide--dimethylbenzimidazole phosphoribosyltransferase (EC 2.4.2.21).|
HMDB0011729::1-Kestose is a fructooligosaccharide. An oligosaccharide is a saccharide polymer containing a small number (typically three to six) of component sugars, also known as simple sugars. They are generally found either O- or N-linked to compatible amino acid side chains in proteins or to lipid moieties.|
HMDB0011730::Melezitose, also spelled melicitose, is a nonreducing trisaccharide sugar that is produced by many plant sap eating insects, including aphids such as Cinara pilicornis by an enzyme reaction. This is beneficial to the insects, as it reduces the stress of osmosis by reducing their own water potential. The melezitose is part of the honeydew which acts as an attractant for ants and also as a food for bees. This is useful to the lice as they have a symbiotic relationship with ants. Melezitose can be partially hydrolyzed to glucose and turanose the latter of which is an isomer of sucrose (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0002985::Inositol phosphate is an intermediate step in the metabolism of glucose-6-phosphate to myo-inositol. myo-Inositol is synthesized from glucose-6-phosphate (G-6-P) in two steps. First, G-6-P is isomerised by INYNA1 to myo-inositol 1-phosphate, which is then dephosphorylated by IMPA1 to give myo-inositol.|
HMDB0003431::L-Histidinol, a structural analogue of the essential amino acid L-histidine, enhances the toxicity of a variety of anticancer drugs for many tumor cells of animal origin. (PMID 8297120  ). L-histidinol inhibits human Myristoyl- CoA:protein-myristoyltransferase (hNMT) (an essential eukaryotic enzyme that catalyzes the cotranslational transfer of myristate to the NH2-terminal glycine residue of a number of important proteins of diverse function). (PMID 9778369  ).|
HMDB0001104::N-Acetyl-b-glucosaminylamine is the product of a reaction catalyzed vy the enzyme N(4)-(beta-N-acetylglucosaminyl)-L-asparaginase [EC 3.5.1.26, Aspartylglucosaminidase, AGA]. AGA is a key enzyme in the catabolism of N-linked oligosaccharides of glycoproteins. It cleaves the asparagine from the residual N-acetylglucosamines as one of the final steps in the lysosomal breakdown of glycoproteins. Aspartylglucosaminuria (AGU) is a lysosomal disease caused by deficiency of N-aspartyl-beta-glucosaminidase. AGU is the only known lysosomal storage disease caused by an amidase deficiency. (OMIM208400  ).|
HMDB0000828::Ureidosuccinic acid, also known as L-ureidosuccinate or carbamyl-L-aspartate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as aspartic acid and derivatives. Aspartic acid and derivatives are compounds containing an aspartic acid or a derivative thereof resulting from reaction of aspartic acid at the amino group or the carboxy group, or from the replacement of any hydrogen of glycine by a heteroatom. Ureidosuccinic acid exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Ureidosuccinic acid has been found in human prostate tissue, and has also been primarily detected in saliva. Within the cell, ureidosuccinic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Ureidosuccinic acid exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Ureidosuccinic acid participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, Ureidosuccinic acid can be biosynthesized from carbamoyl phosphate and L-aspartic acid through its interaction with the enzyme cad protein. In addition, Ureidosuccinic acid can be biosynthesized from carbamoyl phosphate through the action of the enzyme cad protein. In humans, ureidosuccinic acid is involved in the pyrimidine metabolism pathway and the aspartate metabolism pathway. Ureidosuccinic acid is also involved in several metabolic disorders, some of which include the mngie (mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal encephalopathy) pathway, UMP synthase deficiency (orotic aciduria), the hypoacetylaspartia pathway, and the canavan disease pathway. Outside of the human body, ureidosuccinic acid can be found in a number of food items such as red beetroot, black crowberry, macadamia nut, and rowal. This makes ureidosuccinic acid a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0011754::Methyldopa or alpha-methyldopa (brand names Aldomet, Apo-Methyldopa, Dopamet, Novomedopa) is a centrally-acting adrenergic antihypertensive medication. Its use is now deprecated following introduction of alternative safer classes of agents. However it continues to have a role in otherwise difficult to treat hypertension and gestational hypertension (formerly known as pregnancy-induced hypertension). Methyldopa is an aromatic-amino-acid decarboxylase inhibitor in animals and in man. Only methyldopa, the L-isomer of alpha-methyldopa, has the ability to inhibit dopa decarboxylase and to deplete animal tissues of norepinephrine. In man the antihypertensive activity appears to be due solely to the L-isomer. About twice the dose of the racemate (DL-alpha-methyldopa) is required for equal antihypertensive effect. Methyldopa has no direct effect on cardiac function and usually does not reduce glomerular filtration rate, renal blood flow, or filtration fraction. Cardiac output usually is maintained without cardiac acceleration. In some patients the heart rate is slowed. Normal or elevated plasma renin activity may decrease in the course of methyldopa therapy. Methyldopa reduces both supine and standing blood pressure. Methyldopa usually produces highly effective lowering of the supine pressure with infrequent symptomatic postural hypotension. Exercise hypotension and diurnal blood pressure variations rarely occur. Methyldopa, in its active metabolite form, is a central alpha-2 receptor agonist. Using methyldopa leads to alpha-2 receptor-negative feedback to sympathetic nervous system (SNS) (centrally and peripherally), allowing peripheral sympathetic nervous system tone to decrease. Such activity leads to a decrease in total peripheral resistance (TPR) and cardiac output. When introduced it was a mainstay of antihypertensive therapy, but its use has declined, with increased use of other safer classes of agents. One of its important present-day uses is in the management of pregnancy-induced hypertension, as it is relatively safe in pregnancy compared to other antihypertensive drugs (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0003070::Shikimic acid, more commonly known as its anionic form shikimate, is an important biochemical intermediate in plants and microorganisms. Its name comes from the Japanese flower shikimi (シキミ, Illicium anisatum), from which it was first isolated. Shikimic acid is a precursor for: the aromatic amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine; indole, indole derivatives and tryptophan; many alkaloids and other aromatic metabolites; tannins; and lignin. In pharmaceutical industry, shikimic acid from chinese star anise is used as a base material for production of Tamiflu (oseltamivir). Although shikimic acid is present in most autotrophic organisms, it is a biosynthetic intermediate and generally found in very low concentrations (Wikipedia).|
HMDB0000241::Protoporphyrins are tetrapyrroles containing 4 methyl, 2 propionic, and 2 vinyl side chains. Protoporphyrin is produced by oxidation of the methylene bridge of protoporphyrinogen. Protoporphyrin IX is the only naturally occurring isomer; it is an intermediate in heme biosynthesis, combining with ferrous iron to form protoheme IX, the heme prosthetic group of hemoglobin. Protoporphyrin IX is created by the enzyme protoporphyrinogen oxidase. The enzyme ferrochelatase converts it into heme. Protoporphyrin IX naturally occurs in small amounts in feces. Protoporphyrin IX is also responsible for the brown pigment (ooporphyrin) of birds' eggs. Protoporphyrin IX is used as a branch point in the biosynthetic pathway leading to heme (by insertion of iron) and chlorophylls (by insertion of Mg and further side-chain transformation). Protoporphyrin IX can be used to treat liver disorders, mainly as the sodium salt. Under certain conditions, protoporphyrin IX can act as a neurotoxin, a phototoxin, and a metabotoxin. A neurotoxin causes damage to nerve cells and nerve tissues. A phototoxin causes cell damage upon exposure to light. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of porphyrins are associated with porphyrias such as porphyria variegate, acute intermittent porphyria, and hereditary coproporphyria (HCP). In particular, it is accumulated and excreted excessively in the feces in acute intermittent porphyria, protoporphyria, and variegate porphyria. There are several types of porphyrias (most are inherited). Hepatic porphyrias are characterized by acute neurological attacks (seizures, psychosis, extreme back and abdominal pain, and an acute polyneuropathy), while the erythropoietic forms present with skin problems (usually a light-sensitive blistering rash and increased hair growth). The neurotoxicity of porphyrins may be due to their selective interactions with tubulin, which disrupt microtubule formation and cause neural malformations (PMID: 3441503  ).|
HMDB0000936::Uroporphyrin is the porphyrin produced by oxidation of the methylene bridges in uroporphyrinogen. Uroporphyrins have four acetic acid and four propionic acid side chains attached to their pyrrole rings. The enzyme uroporphyrinogen I synthase catalyzes the formation of hydroxymethylbilane from four molecules of porphobilinogen. Uroporphyrinogen III cosynthase then catalyzes the conversion of hydroxymethylbilane into uroporphyrinogen III. Otherwise, hydroxymethylbilane cyclizes nonenzymatically to form uroporphyrinogen I. Uroporphyrinogen I and III yield their respective uroporphyrins via autooxidation or their respective coproporphyrinogens via decarboxylation. Excessive amounts of uroporphyrin I are excreted in congenital erythropoietic porphyria, and both uroporphyrin I and uroporphyrin III are excreted in porphyria cutanea tarda. Uroporphyrin I and III are the most common isomers. Under certain conditions, uroporphyrin I can act as a phototoxin, a neurotoxin, and a metabotoxin. A phototoxin leads to cell damage upon exposure to light. A neurotoxin causes damage to nerve cells and nerve tissues. A metabotoxin is an endogenously produced metabolite that causes adverse health effects at chronically high levels. Chronically high levels of porphyrins are associated with porphyrias such as porphyria variegate, acute intermittent porphyria, porphyria cutanea tarda, and hereditary coproporphyria (HCP). There are several types of porphyrias (most are inherited). Hepatic porphyrias are characterized by acute neurological attacks (seizures, psychosis, extreme back and abdominal pain, and an acute polyneuropathy), while the erythropoietic forms present with skin problems (usually a light-sensitive blistering rash and increased hair growth). The neurotoxicity of porphyrins may be due to their selective interactions with tubulin, which disrupt microtubule formation and cause neural malformations (PMID: 3441503  ).|
HMDB0001263::Allysine is a derivative of Lysine, used in the production of elastin and collagen. It is produced by the actions of the enzyme lysyl oxidase in the extracellular matrix and is essential in the crosslink formation that stabilizes collagen and elastin.|
HMDB0000359::3α,7α-Dihydroxycoprostanic acid is a bile acid excreted in small amounts in the urine of healthy subjects (PMID: 864325  ). 3α,7α-Dihydroxycoprostanic acid is the precursor to chenodeoxycholic acid, a bile acid. Bile acids are steroid acids found predominantly in the bile of mammals. The distinction between different bile acids is minute, depending only on the presence or absence of hydroxyl groups on positions 3, 7, and 12. Bile acids are physiological detergents that facilitate excretion, absorption, and transport of fats and sterols in the intestine and liver. Bile acids are also steroidal amphipathic molecules derived from the catabolism of cholesterol. They modulate bile flow and lipid secretion, are essential for the absorption of dietary fats and vitamins, and have been implicated in the regulation of all the key enzymes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. Bile acids recirculate through the liver, bile ducts, small intestine, and portal vein to form an enterohepatic circuit. They exist as anions at physiological pH, and consequently require a carrier for transport across the membranes of the enterohepatic tissues. The unique detergent properties of bile acids are essential for the digestion and intestinal absorption of hydrophobic nutrients. Bile acids have potent toxic properties (e.g. membrane disruption) and there are a plethora of mechanisms to limit their accumulation in blood and tissues.|
HMDB0061196::Angiotensin I appears to have no biological activity and exists solely as a precursor to angiotensin 2. Angiotensin I is formed by the action of renin on angiotensinogen. Renin cleaves the peptide bond between the leucine (Leu) and valine (Val) residues on angiotensinogen, creating the ten-amino acid peptide (des-Asp) angiotensin I. Renin is produced in the kidneys in response to renal sympathetic activity, decreased intrarenal blood pressure at the juxtaglomerular cells, or decreased delivery of Na+ and Cl- to the macula densa.[3] If less Na+ is sensed by the macula densa, renin release by juxtaglomerular cells is increased. (Wikipedia)|
HMDB0000851::Pyridinoline belongs to the class of organic compounds known as l-alpha-amino acids. These are alpha amino acids which have the L-configuration of the alpha-carbon atom. Pyridinoline is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Pyridinoline has been found throughout most human tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. |
HMDB0000286::Uridine diphosphate glucose is a key intermediate in carbohydrate metabolism. Serves as a precursor of glycogen, can be metabolized into UDPgalactose and UDPglucuronic acid which can then be incorporated into polysaccharides as galactose and glucuronic acid. Also serves as a precursor of sucrose lipopolysaccharides, and glycosphingolipids.|
HMDB0000751::L-Threo-2-pentulose, or L-xylulose, is a ketopentose, a monosaccharide containing five carbon atoms, and including a ketone functional group. It has chemical formula C5H10O5. L-Xylulose accumulates in the urine of pentosuria patients. Since L-xylulose is a reducing sugar like D-glucose, pentosuria patients have been wrongly diagnosed in the past to be diabetic.|
HMDB0000830::Neuraminic acids are the commonest sialic acids in nature. Most sialic acids on gangliosides share a core neuraminic acid (Neu) structure and are N-acylated at the C-5 position with either an N-acetyl or an N-glycolyl group (giving Neu5Ac or Neu5Gc, respectively). It was originally thought that unsubstituted glycosidically linked Neu did not occur in nature. However, there have been several reports suggesting its presence in gangliosides and more recently in mucin-type glycoproteins. The N- or O-substituted derivatives of neuraminic acid are collectively known as sialic acids, the predominant one being N-acetylneuraminic acid. The amino group bears either an acetyl or a glycolyl group. The hydroxyl substituents may vary considerably: acetyl, lactyl, methyl, sulfate and phosphate groups have been found. Sialic acids are found widely distributed in animal tissues. Sialic acid rich glycoproteins bind selectin in humans and other organisms. Cancer cells that can metastasize often have a lot of sialic acid rich glycoproteins. This helps these late stage cancer cells enter the blood stream. (PMID: 11884388  ).|
HMDB0002649::Erythrose, also known as L-threose, is a member of the class of compounds known as pentoses. Pentoses are monosaccharides in which the carbohydrate moiety contains five carbon atoms. Erythrose is very soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Erythrose can be found in blood, as well as in human cartilage tissue. Within the cell, erythrose is primarily located in the cytoplasm (predicted from logP). Erythrose exists in all living organisms, ranging from bacteria to humans. Erythrose is found to be associated with schizophrenia. Erythrose was first isolated in 1849 from rhubarb by the French pharmacist Louis Feux Joseph Garot (1798-1869) and was named as such because of its red hue in the presence of alkali metals (ἐρυθρός, "red") (Wikipedia). D-Erythrose is a tetrose carbohydrate with chemical formula C4H8O4. It has one aldehyde group, and therefore is part of the aldose family. It is a syrupy liquid at room temperature.|
HMDB0001270::1,3-Bisphosphogylcerate (1,3BPG), also known as PGAP, is a 3-carbon organic molecule present in most, if not all living creatures. It primarily exists as a metabolic intermediate in glycolysis during respiration. 1,3BPG have been recognized as regulatory signal implicated in the control of metabolism, oxygen affinity of red cells and other cellular functions. 1,3BPG concentration in erythrocytes changes in a number of pathological conditions, such as Inherited Phosphoglycerate kinase deficiency in erythrocytes (involved in the synthesis and breakdown of 1,3 BPG). (PMID 3555887  ). 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate is the anion form of bisphosphoglyceric acid. It is phosphorylated at the number 1 and 3 carbons. The result of this phosphorylation gives 1,3BPG important biological properties such as the ability to phosphorylate ADP to form the energy storage molecule ATP.(wikipedia).|
HMDB0002776::13,14-dihydro-15-keto-PGE2 is one of the prostaglandin E2 metabolites. (PMID 7190512  ) Human fetal lung in vitro has the competence to self-differentiate, as early as 12 weeks gestation and presence of high levels in fetal lung of the inactive metabolite 13,14-dihydro-15-keto-PGE2 relative to PGE2 suggests that active prostaglandin catabolism may be one of the mechanisms to retard this stage of maturation in vivo by limiting PGE2 availability. (PMID 8835315  )Dinoprostone is a naturally occurring prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and the most common and most biologically active of the mammalian prostaglandins. It has important effects in labour and also stimulates osteoblasts to release factors which stimulate bone resorption by osteoclasts (a type of bone cell that removes bone tissue by removing the bone's mineralized matrix). PGE2 has been shown to increase vasodilation and cAMP production, to enhance the effects of bradykinin and histamine, to induce uterine contractions and to activate platelet aggregation. PGE2 is also responsible for maintaining the open passageway of the fetal ductus arteriosus; decreasing T-cell proliferation and lymphocyte migration and activating the secretion of IL-1alpha and IL-2. PGE2 exhibits both pro- and anti-inflammatory effects, particularly on dendritic cells (DC). Depending on the nature of maturation signals, PGE2 has different and sometimes opposite effects on DC biology. PGE2 exerts an inhibitory action, reducing the maturation of DC and their ability to present antigen. PGE2 has also been shown to stimulate DC and promote IL-12 production when given in combination with TNF-alpha.| PGE2 (prostaglandin E2) is an environmentally bioactive substance. Its action is prolonged and sustained by other factors especially IL-10. It modulates the activities of professional DC by acting on their differentiation, maturation and their ability to secrete cytokines. PGE2 is a potent inducer of IL-10 in bone marrow-derived DC (BM-DC), and PGE2-induced IL-10 is a key regulator of the BM-DC pro-inflammatory phenotype. (PMID: 16978535  )Prostaglandins are eicosanoids. The eicosanoids consist of the prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), leukotrienes (LTs) and lipoxins (LXs). The PGs and TXs are collectively identified as prostanoids. Prostaglandins were originally shown to be synthesized in the prostate gland, thromboxanes from platelets (thrombocytes) and leukotrienes from leukocytes, hence the derivation of their names. All mammalian cells except erythrocytes synthesize eicosanoids. These molecules are extremely potent, able to cause profound physiological effects at very dilute concentrations. All eicosanoids function locally at the site of synthesis, through receptor-mediated G-protein linked signaling pathways.|
HMDB0001238::N-Acetylserotonin is an intermediate in the metabolic pathway of melatonin and indoleamine in the pineal gland of mammalians. Serotonin-N-acetyltransferase (SNAT), which regulates the rate of melatonin biosynthesis in the pineal gland, catalyzes the acetylation of 5HT to N-acetylserotonin (NAS). A methyl group from S-adenosylmethionine is transferred to NAS by hydroxyindole-O-methyltransferase (HIOMT), and finally NAS is converted to 5-methoxy-N-acetyltryptamine, or melatonin. In most mammalian species the content of NAS (and melatonin) in the pineal gland shows clear circadian changes with the highest level occurring during the dark period. This elevation of the contents of NAS (and melatonin) in the dark period is due to the increase of SNAT activity and the elevation of SNAT gene expression. Experimental studies show that N-acetylserotonin possess free radical scavenging activity. Acute administration of irreversible and reversible selective MAO-A inhibitors and high doses (or chronic administration of low doses) of relatively selective MAO-B inhibitors (but not of highly selective MAO-B inhibitors) suppressed MAO-A activity and stimulated N-acetylation of pineal serotonin into N-acetylserotonin, the immediate precursor of melatonin. N-acetylserotonin increase after MAO-A inhibitors might mediate their antidepressive and antihypertensive effects. N-Acetylserotonin is the product of the O-demethylation of melatonin mediated by cytochrome P-450 isoforms: Cytochrome p450, subfamily IIc, polypeptide 19 (CYP2C19, a clinically important enzyme that metabolizes a wide variety of drugs), with a minor contribution from Cytochrome p450, subfamily I, polypeptide (2CYP1A2, involved in O-deethylation of phenacetin). (PMID 15616152  , 11103901  , 10721079  , 10591054  ).|
HMDB0002096::3-Indolebutyric acid is an indolic tryptophan metabolite occasionally found in human urine. (PMID: 7130309  ). 3-Indolebutyric acid is a plasma and urinary tryptophan -related metabolite related to metabolic and skin diseases. (PMID: 15206797  ). Plasma levels of tryptophan metabolites in the umbilical vein and artery are significantly higher than those in the maternal vein. (PMID: 1506727  ). 3-Indolebutyric acid has been shown to accelerated glucose uptake in the rat diaphragm. (PMID: 6025019  ).|
HMDB0004586::Perillic acid is an intermediate in the Limonene and pinene degradation pathway. (KEGG). Its measurement in urine is used to monitor cancer patients receiving oral Limonene (a farnesyl transferase inhibitor that has shown antitumor properties)(PubMed ID 8723738 ).|
HMDB0002320::Imidazolelactic acid is the component of normal human urine. (PMID: 5856262  ). histidine loading causes an increase in the excretion of imidazolelactic acid. (PMID: 6021220  ). During pregnancy the values for imidazolelactic acid in urine is increased 3-fold. An interaction of allergic reactions and anomalies in the metabolism of the sex hormones are considered to form the basis of the pregnancy-specific illnesses that were studied. (PMID: 5789877  ). Urinary excretion of imidazolelactic acid is also an indication for folic acid and vitamin B12 deficiency. (PMID: 4645251  ).|
HMDB0031404::Cyclohexylamine is a food contaminant arising from its use as a boiler water additive Cyclohexylamine, also called hexahydroaniline, 1-aminocyclohexane, or aminohexahydrobenzene, is an organic chemical, an amine derived from cyclohexane. It is a clear to yellowish liquid with fishy odor, with melting point of 17.7 ¬∞C and boiling point 134.5 ¬∞C, miscible with water. Like other amines, it is of mildly alkaline nature, compared to strong bases such as NaOH, but it is a stronger base than its aromatic sister compound aniline, which differs only in that its ring is aromatic. It is flammable, with flash point at 28.6 ¬∞C. Explosive mixtures with air can be formed above 26 ¬∞C. It is toxic by both ingestion and inhalation; the inhalation itself may be fatal. It readily absorbs through skin, which it irritates. It is corrosive. Cyclohexylamine is listed as an extremely hazardous substance as defined by Section 302 of the U.S. Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act|
HMDB0003069::20a-Dihydroprogesterone is a biologically active 20-alpha-reduced metabolite of progesterone. It is converted from progesterone to 20-alpha-hydroxypregn-4-en-3-one by the 20-alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in the corpus luteum and the placenta. -- Pubchem; Progesterone is a C-21 steroid hormone involved in the female menstrual cycle, pregnancy (supports gestation) and embryogenesis of humans and other species. Progesterone belongs to a class of hormones called progestagens, and is the major naturally occurring human progestagen. -- Wikipedia; During implantation and gestation, progesterone appears to decrease the maternal immune response to allow for the acceptance of the pregnancy. Progesterone decreases contractility of the uterine smooth muscle. The fetus metabolizes placental progesterone in the production of adrenal mineralo- and glucosteroids. A drop in progesterone levels is possibly one step that facilitates the onset of labor. In addition progesterone inhibits lactation during pregnancy. The fall in progesterone levels following delivery is one of the triggers for milk production. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0000369::3b,17b-Dihydroxyetiocholane, also known as 5b-androstan-3b,17b-diol, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as androgens and derivatives. These are 3-hydroxylated C19 steroid hormones. They are known to favor the development of masculine characteristics. They also show profound effects on scalp and body hair in humans. 3b,17b-Dihydroxyetiocholane is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. 3b,17b-Dihydroxyetiocholane has been found in human hepatic tissue tissue, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as blood and urine. Within the cell, 3b,17b-dihydroxyetiocholane is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm.|
HMDB0001455::This compound is the byproduct of 3beta-hydroxy-5alpha-steroid dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.278). With regard to hypothermia, the compound interferes with the development of rapid tolerance to the anxiolytic effect of ethanol. (PMID: 16612485  ).|
HMDB0000031::Androsterone is an inactive breakdown metabolite of testosterone, the product of a reaction mediated by the enzyme oxidative 17beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.51, 17beta-HSD). Androsterone can also be metabolized from other adrenal androgens such as dehydroepiandrosterone, dihydrotestosterone, or androstenedione, and is considered an inactive end product. However, it can be a physiological effector in its own right. Androsterone might be converted back to dihydrotestosterone. Humans (and other primates) are unique among mammals in having high levels of circulating androsterone glucuronide, a process that is the major role of uridine-diphospho-glucuronosyltransferase enzymes (EC 2.4.1.17, UGT) for glucuronidation of steroid metabolism in humans. Conjugation of androsterone is a pathway found in all vertebrates and it is widely recognized that the liver is a major site of glucuronidation. However, it is now clear that extrahepatic tissues are also involved in the conjugation of compounds to which these tissues are exposed. High levels of androsterone glucuronide found in the human prostate, breast cyst fluid, and ovary follicular fluid suggest that glucuronidation of 5alpha-reduced C19 steroids occurs in these tissues as well. In doping control, the ratio of androsterone/etiocholanolone provides valuable information that allows the assignment of a urine specimen to a particular person or the identification of urine samples with identical steroid profiles; this is particularly important to detect attempts of urine manipulation including urine alteration and substitution (PMID: 9188497  , 17017935  , 14643063  , 12943709  , 9699884  , 17260133  ).|
HMDB0000493::Androstane-3,17-diol is a metabolite of dihydrotestosterone. It doesn't bind androgen receptors, but efficiently binds the estrogen receptor beta and inhibits prostate cancer cell migration through the activation of estrogen receptor beta. (PMID 15958594  ).|
HMDB0000546::Epietiocholanolone, also known as 5b-epiandrosterone or M1A, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as androgens and derivatives. These are 3-hydroxylated C19 steroid hormones. They are known to favor the development of masculine characteristics. They also show profound effects on scalp and body hair in humans. Thus, epietiocholanolone is considered to be a steroid lipid molecule. Epietiocholanolone exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Epietiocholanolone has been found in human hepatic tissue and kidney tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as blood and urine. Within the cell, epietiocholanolone is primarily located in the cytoplasm and membrane (predicted from logP).|
HMDB0001471::Epipregnanolone is a pregnane found in the urine of pregnant women and sows. It has anesthetic, hypnotic, and sedative properties. It is a substrate of the enzyme 3beta-hydroxy-5beta-steroid dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.277).|
HMDB0000774::Pregnenolone sulfate belongs to the class of organic compounds known as sulfated steroids. These are sterol lipids containing a sulfate group attached to the steroid skeleton. Pregnenolone sulfate is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Pregnenolone sulfate has been found throughout most human tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. Within the cell, pregnenolone sulfate is primarily located in the cytoplasm, membrane (predicted from logP) and endoplasmic reticulum.|
HMDB0060501::Phosphatidylethanolamine (cephalin, sometimes abbreviated PE) is a lipid found in biological membranes. It is synthesized by the addition of CDP-ethanolamine to diglyceride, releasing CMP. S-adenosyl methionine can subsequently methylate the amine of phosphatidyl ethanolamine to yield phosphatidyl choline. Cephalin is a phospholipid, which is a lipid derivative. It is not to be confused with the molecule of the same name that is an alkaloid constituent of Ipecac. (Wikipedia)|
HMDB0031602::Allyl acetic acid, also known as 4-pentenoate or allylacetate, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as straight chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with a straight aliphatic chain. Allyl acetic acid exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Allyl acetic acid has been primarily detected in urine. Within the cell, allyl acetic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and adiposome. Allyl acetic acid can be converted into L-2-amino-4-chloropent-4-enoic acid and 2-oxopent-4-enoic acid. Allyl acetic acid has a cheese, parmesan, and ricotta taste.|
HMDB0004025::Pregnanediol is an endogenous human testosterone metabolite. It can be detected in adults and newborns urine in variable concentrations. Pregnanediol is abnormally elevated in patients with cytochrome P450 (P450C17, steroid 17alpha-monooxygenase, EC 1.14.99.9) oxidoreductase deficiency (Antley-Bixler syndrome, PORD, OMIM 201750  ). Antley-Bixler syndrome is a multiple congenital malformation syndrome with craniosynostosis, radiohumeral synostosis, femoral bowing, choanal atresia or stenosis, joint contractures, urogenital abnormalities and, often, early death. An assay of urinary pregnanediol excretion provides an accurate indication of outcome in threatened abortion in 74 - 93% per cent of cases. Pregnanediol is one of the most important markers of pregnenolone administration, which can potentially be abused by athletes to maintain an equilibration of the steroidal environment after sex steroids administrations. Patients with recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis have significantly lower levels of urinary pregnanediol. (PMID: 126703  , 16608896  , 16906539  , 1191599  , 2905284  , 15763596  , 10360427  , 11159778  , 16687200  ).|
HMDB0000238::Sepiapterin is an intermediate in the salvage pathway of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)). It is a yellow fluorescing pigment. Sepiapterin accumulates in the brain of patients with sepiapterin reductase (SR) deficiency, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0000736::Isobutyryl-L-carnitine is a product of the acyl-CoA dehydrogenases (ACADs), which are a group of mitochondrial enzymes involved in the metabolism of fatty acids or branched-chain amino acids (OMIM: 600301  ). Isobutyryl-L-carnitine is a member of the class of compounds known as acyl carnitines. Acyl carnitines are organic compounds containing a fatty acid with the carboxylic acid attached to carnitine through an ester bond. Isobutyryl-L-carnitine is practically insoluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa).|
HMDB0000534::Campestanol, also known as chalinastanol, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as ergosterols and derivatives. These are steroids containing ergosta-5,7,22-trien-3beta-ol or a derivative thereof, which is based on the 3beta-hydroxylated ergostane skeleton. Campestanol is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. Campestanol has been found in human hepatic tissue tissue, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as blood and urine. Within the cell, campestanol is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP) and cytoplasm.|
HMDB0002374::Avenasterol is a phytosterol. Phytosterols, or plant sterols, are compounds that occur naturally and bear close structural resemblance to cholesterol, but have different side-chain configurations. Phytosterols are relevant in pharmaceuticals (production of therapeutic steroids), nutrition (anti-cholesterol additives in functional foods, anti-cancer properties), and cosmetics (creams, lipstick). Phytosterols can be obtained from vegetable oils or from industrial wastes, which gives an added value to the latter. Considerable efforts have been recently dedicated to the development of efficient processes for phytosterol isolation from natural sources. The present work aims to summarize information on the applications of phytosterols and to review recent approaches, mainly from the industry, for the large-scale recovery of phytosterols (PMID: 17123816  , 16481154  ). Avenasterol is found to be associated with phytosterolemia, which is an inborn error of metabolism.|
HMDB0006059::20-Carboxyleukotriene B4 is an omega-oxidized metabolite of leukotriene B4 (LTB4). Neutrophil microsomes are known to oxidize 20-hydroxy-LTB4 (20-OH-LTB4) to its 20-oxo and 20-carboxy derivatives in the presence of NADPH. This activity has been ascribed to LTB4 omega-hydroxylase (cytochrome P-450LTB omega). Leukotriene B4 release from polymorphonuclear granulocytes of severely burned patients was reduced as compared to healthy donor cells. This decrease is due to an enhanced conversion of LTB4 into the 20-hydroxy- and 20-carboxy-metabolites and further to a decreased LTB4-synthesis. LTB4 is the major metabolite in neutrophil polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Leukotrienes are metabolites of arachidonic acid derived from the action of 5-LO (5-lipoxygenase). The immediate product of 5-LO is LTA4 (leukotriene A4), which is enzymatically converted into either LTB4 (leukotriene B4) by LTA4 hydrolase or LTC4 (leukotriene C4) by LTC4 synthase. The regulation of leukotriene production occurs at various levels, including expression of 5-LO, translocation of 5-LO to the perinuclear region and phosphorylation to either enhance or inhibit the activity of 5-LO. Biologically active LTB4 is metabolized by w-oxidation carried out by specific cytochrome P450s (CYP4F) followed by beta-oxidation from the w-carboxy position and after CoA ester formation.| Other specific pathways of leukotriene metabolism include the 12-hydroxydehydrogenase/ 15-oxo-prostaglandin-13-reductase that form a series of conjugated diene metabolites that have been observed to be excreted into human urine. Metabolism of LTC4 occurs by sequential peptide cleavage reactions involving a gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase that forms LTD4 (leukotriene D4) and a membrane-bound dipeptidase that converts LTD4 into LTE4 (leukotriene E4) before w-oxidation. These metabolic transformations of the primary leukotrienes are critical for termination of their biological activity, and defects in expression of participating enzymes may be involved in specific genetic disease. (PMID 17623009  , 7633595  , 2155225  , 3039534  )Leukotrienes are eicosanoids. The eicosanoids consist of the prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), leukotrienes (LTs) and lipoxins (LXs). The PGs and TXs are collectively identified as prostanoids. Prostaglandins were originally shown to be synthesized in the prostate gland, thromboxanes from platelets (thrombocytes) and leukotrienes from leukocytes, hence the derivation of their names. All mammalian cells except erythrocytes synthesize eicosanoids. These molecules are extremely potent, able to cause profound physiological effects at very dilute concentrations. All eicosanoids function locally at the site of synthesis, through receptor-mediated G-protein linked signaling pathways.|
HMDB0001509::20-hydroxy- Leukotriene B4 (20-OH-LTB4) is an omega-hydroxylated metabolite of leukotriene B4 in human neutrophils. Elevated urinary concentrations of 20-OH-LTB4 and LTB4 are found in patients with Sjogren-Larsson syndrome (SLS, OMIM 270220  ), an autosomal recessively inherited neurocutaneous disorder caused by a deficiency of the microsomal enzyme fatty aldehyde dehydrogenase (FALDH), which as an essential role in LTB4 metabolism. Preterm birth seems to be one of the features of the syndrome. The reason for the preterm birth is unclear. It is hypothesized that it relates to the defective LTB4 degradation in SLS. The pathological urinary excretion of LTB4 and 20-OH-LTB4 is a biochemical marker for SLS. Surprisingly, 20-OH-LTB4 concentrations are normal in CSF.| Leukotriene B4 is the major metabolite in neutrophil polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Leukotrienes are metabolites of arachidonic acid derived from the action of 5-LO (5-lipoxygenase). The immediate product of 5-LO is LTA4 (leukotriene A4), which is enzymatically converted into either LTB4 (leukotriene B4) by LTA4 hydrolase or LTC4 (leukotriene C4) by LTC4 synthase. The regulation of leukotriene production occurs at various levels, including expression of 5-LO, translocation of 5-LO to the perinuclear region and phosphorylation to either enhance or inhibit the activity of 5-LO. Biologically active LTB4 is metabolized by w-oxidation carried out by specific cytochrome P450s (CYP4F) followed by beta-oxidation from the w-carboxy position and after CoA ester formation.| Other specific pathways of leukotriene metabolism include the 12-hydroxydehydrogenase/ 15-oxo-prostaglandin-13-reductase that form a series of conjugated diene metabolites that have been observed to be excreted into human urine. Metabolism of LTC4 occurs by sequential peptide cleavage reactions involving a gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase that forms LTD4 (leukotriene D4) and a membrane-bound dipeptidase that converts LTD4 into LTE4 (leukotriene E4) before w-oxidation. These metabolic transformations of the primary leukotrienes are critical for termination of their biological activity, and defects in expression of participating enzymes may be involved in specific genetic disease. (PMID: 12709426  , 9799565  , 11408337  , 17623009  ). Leukotrienes are eicosanoids. The eicosanoids consist of the prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs), leukotrienes (LTs) and lipoxins (LXs). The PGs and TXs are collectively identified as prostanoids. Prostaglandins were originally shown to be synthesized in the prostate gland, thromboxanes from platelets (thrombocytes) and leukotrienes from leukocytes, hence the derivation of their names. All mammalian cells except erythrocytes synthesize eicosanoids. These molecules are extremely potent, able to cause profound physiological effects at very dilute concentrations. All eicosanoids function locally at the site of synthesis, through receptor-mediated G-protein linked signaling pathways.|
HMDB0001476::3-Hydroxyanthranilic acid, also known as 2-amino-3-hydroxy-benzoate or 3-ohaa, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as hydroxybenzoic acid derivatives. Hydroxybenzoic acid derivatives are compounds containing a hydroxybenzoic acid (or a derivative), which is a benzene ring bearing a carboxyl and a hydroxyl groups. 3-Hydroxyanthranilic acid exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and a moderately acidic compound (based on its pKa). 3-Hydroxyanthranilic acid has been found in human epidermis and bladder tissues, and has also been detected in multiple biofluids, such as urine and blood. Within the cell, 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm. 3-Hydroxyanthranilic acid exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. 3-Hydroxyanthranilic acid participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, 3-Hydroxyanthranilic acid and L-alanine can be biosynthesized from L-3-hydroxykynurenine; which is catalyzed by the enzyme kynureninase. Furthermore, 3-Hydroxyanthranilic acid can be converted into cinnavalininate through its interaction with the enzyme catalase. Furthermore, L-Alanine and 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid can be biosynthesized from 3-hydroxy-L-kynurenine through its interaction with the enzyme kynureninase. Furthermore, 3-Hydroxyanthranilic acid can be converted into 2-amino-3-carboxymuconic acid semialdehyde; which is catalyzed by the enzyme 3-hydroxyanthranilate 3,4-dioxygenase. Furthermore, 3-Hydroxyanthranilic acid can be converted into 2-amino-3-carboxymuconic acid semialdehyde through the action of the enzyme 3-hydroxyanthranilate 3,4-dioxygenase. Finally, L-Alanine and 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid can be biosynthesized from 3-hydroxy-L-kynurenine; which is mediated by the enzyme kynureninase. In humans, 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid is involved in the tryptophan metabolism pathway.|
HMDB0001201::Guanosine 5'-(trihydrogen diphosphate). A guanine nucleotide containing two phosphate groups esterified to the sugar moiety. It is an ester of pyrophosphoric acid with the nucleoside guanosine. GDP consists of the pyrophosphate group, the pentose sugar ribose, and the nucleobase guanine. GDP is the product of GTP dephosphorylation by GTPases, e.g. the G-proteins that are involved in signal transduction.|
HMDB0001273::Guanosine triphosphate (GTP) is a guanine nucleotide containing three phosphate groups esterified to the sugar moiety. GTP functions as a carrier of phosphates and pyrophosphates involved in channeling chemical energy into specific biosynthetic pathways. GTP activates the signal transducing G proteins which are involved in various cellular processes including proliferation, differentiation, and activation of several intracellular kinase cascades. Proliferation and apoptosis are regulated in part by the hydrolysis of GTP by small GTPases Ras and Rho. Another type of small GTPase, Rab, plays a role in the docking and fusion of vesicles and may also be involved in vesicle formation. In addition to its role in signal transduction, GTP also serves as an energy-rich precursor of mononucleotide units in the enzymatic biosynthesis of DNA and RNA.|
HMDB0000538::Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) is a nucleotide consisting of a purine base (adenine) attached to the first carbon atom of ribose (a pentose sugar). Three phosphate groups are esterified at the fifth carbon atom of the ribose. ATP is incorporated into nucleic acids by polymerases in the processes of DNA replication and transcription. ATP contributes to cellular energy charge and participates in overall energy balance, maintaining cellular homeostasis. ATP can act as an extracellular signaling molecule via interactions with specific purinergic receptors to mediate a wide variety of processes as diverse as neurotransmission, inflammation, apoptosis, and bone remodelling. Extracellular ATP and its metabolite adenosine have also been shown to exert a variety of effects on nearly every cell type in human skin, and ATP seems to play a direct role in triggering skin inflammatory, regenerative, and fibrotic responses to mechanical injury, an indirect role in melanocyte proliferation and apoptosis, and a complex role in Langerhans cell-directed adaptive immunity. During exercise, intracellular homeostasis depends on the matching of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) supply and ATP demand. Metabolites play a useful role in communicating the extent of ATP demand to the metabolic supply pathways. Effects as different as proliferation or differentiation, chemotaxis, release of cytokines or lysosomal constituents, and generation of reactive oxygen or nitrogen species are elicited upon stimulation of blood cells with extracellular ATP. The increased concentration of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in erythrocytes from patients with chronic renal failure (CRF) has been observed in many studies but the mechanism leading to these abnormalities still is controversial. (PMID: 15490415  , 15129319  , 14707763  , 14696970  , 11157473  ).|
HMDB0003378::The biologically active molecule nitric oxide (NO) is a simple, membrane-permeable gas with unique chemistry. It is formed by the conversion of L-arginine to L-citrulline, with the release of NO. The enzymatic oxidation of L-arginine to L-citrulline takes place in the presence of oxygen and NADPH using flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), flavin mononucleotide (FMN), heme, thiol, and tetrahydrobiopterin as cofactors. The enzyme responsible for the generation of NO is nitric oxide synthase (E.C. 1.7.99.7; NOS). Three NOS isoforms have been described and shown to be encoded on three distinct genes: neuronal NOS (nNOS, NOS type I), inducible NOS (NOS type II), and endothelial NOS (eNOS, NOS type III). Two of them are constitutively expressed and dependent on the presence of calcium ions and calmodulin to function (nNOS and eNOS), while iNOS is considered non-constitutive and calcium-independent. However, experience has shown that constitutive expression of nNOS and eNOS is not as rigid as previously thought (i.e. either present or absent), but can be dynamically controlled during development and in response to injury. Functionally, NO may act as a hormone, neurotransmitter, paracrine messenger, mediator, cytoprotective molecule, and cytotoxic molecule. NO has multiple cellular molecular targets. It influences the activity of transcription factors, modulates upstream signaling cascades, mRNA stability and translation, and processes the primary gene products.| In the brain, many processes are linked to NO (nitric oxide). NO activates its receptor, soluble guanylate cyclase by binding to it. The stimulation of this enzyme leads to increased synthesis of the second messenger, cGMP, which in turn activates cGMP-dependent kinases in target cells. NO exerts a strong influence on glutamatergic neurotransmission by directly interacting with the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor. Neuronal NOS is connected to NMDA receptors (see below) and sharply increases NO production following activation of this receptor. Thus, the level of endogenously produced NO around NMDA synapses reflects the activity of glutamate-mediated neurotransmission. However, there is recent evidence showing that non-NMDA glutamate receptors (i.e. AMPA and type I metabotropic receptors) also contribute to NO generation. Besides its influence on glutamate, NO is known to have effects on the storage, uptake and/or release of most other neurotransmitters in the CNS (acetylcholine, dopamine, noradrenaline, GABA, taurine, and glycine) as well as of certain neuropeptides. Finally, since NO is a highly diffusible molecule, it may reach extrasynaptic receptors at target cell membranes that are some distance away from the place of NO synthesis. NO is thus capable of mediating both synaptic and nonsynaptic communication processes.| NO is a potent vasodilator (a major endogenous regulator of vascular tone), and an important endothelium-dependent relaxing factor. NO (nitric oxide) is synthesized by NO synthases (NOS) and NOS are inhibited by asymmetrical dimethylarginine (ADMA). ADMA is metabolized by dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase (DDAH) and excreted in the kidneys. Lower ADMA levels in pregnant women compared to non-pregnant controls suggest that ADMA has a role in vascular dilatation and blood pressure changes. Several studies show an increase in ADMA levels in pregnancies complicated with preeclampsia. Elevated ADMA levels in preeclampsia are seen before clinical symptoms have developed; these findings suggest that ADMA has a role in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. In some pulmonary hypertensive states such as ARDS, the production of endogenous NO may be impaired. Nitric oxide inhalation selectively dilates the pulmonary circulation. Significant systemic vasodilation does not occur because NO is inactivated by rapidly binding to hemoglobin. In an injured lung with pulmonary hypertension, inhaled NO produces local vasodilation of well-ventilated lung units and may "steal" blood flow away from unventilated regions. This reduces intrapulmonary shunting and may improve systemic arterial oxygenation. Nitric oxide is a chemical mediator fundamental in the maintenance of adequate tissue perfusion and effective cardiovascular function. The use of nitrates is well established as pharmacological agents but it is only recently that it has been recognized that they act as a source of nitric oxide (PMID: 16966108  , 8752507  , 17181668  , 16005189  ). Nitric oxide is used as a food additive (EAFUS: Everything Added to Food in the United States).|
HMDB0000337::3,4-Dihydroxybutyric acid (also known as 3,4-Dihydroxybutanoic acid or 3,4-DB, or 2-deoxytetronic acid, or 2-DTA) is a normal human urinary metabolite that is excreted in increased concentration in patients with succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) deficiency (PMID 12127325  ), which is a genetic disorder. SSADH deficiency is caused by an enzyme deficiency in GABA degradation. The most constant features with this disease are developmental delay, hypotonia and intellectual disability. Nearly half of SSADH patients exhibit ataxia, behavioral problems, seizures, and hyporeflexia. Normal adults excrete 0.37 +/- 0.15 (SD) mmoles of 3,4-dihydroxybutyrate per 24 hr. 3,4-dihydroxybutyrate is also detectable in blood. The renal clearance of 3,4-dihydroxybutyrate is roughly equal that of creatinine. 3,4-dihydroxybutyric acid has also been found in foods and is believed to be formed via the degradation (cooking) of di- and poly-saccharides (PMID: 1167165  ).  3,4-Dihydroxybutyric acid is believed to play a role in satiety or the feeling of fullness and suppresses food intake (PMID: 3191387  ; PMID: 6720928  ). 3,4-dihydroxybutyric acid is also elevated in the serum of individuals with dementia and may even serve as a predictive biomarker for dementia (PMID: 25177334  ).|
HMDB0002173::Solerol is a volatile component identified in extracts of grape wines and numerous fruits, with aroma being among the most important factors in determining wine character and quality. (PMID: 11052736  ). Solerol (4,5-dihydroxyhexanoic acid lactone) also appears to be a marker for Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH) deficiency and probably arises from the reaction of succinic semialdehyde with an intermediate in the pyruvate dehydrogenase pathway (PMID: 3126356  ). SSADH is a defect in gamma-aminobutyric acid catabolism, resulting in the accumulation of gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB) and causing neurological and cognitive disorders of varying severity.|
HMDB0000449::5a-tetrahydrocorticosterone is highly sensitive to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) secretion. High levels of 5a-Tetrahydrocorticosterone are a warning sign of hypertension. (PMID: 16597193  ,7473516   ).|
HMDB0000352::16a-Hydroxydehydroisoandrosterone is a metabolite present during pregnancy with increased concentrations as it progresses (PMID 6461703  ). A reduced level of 16a-Hydroxydehydroisoandrosterone is observed in cases of Placental sulfatase deficiency (PSD), a rare disorder with low estrogen production due to placental enzymatic deficiency. (PMID 2150812  ).|
HMDB0005821::Beta-Cortol is a normal androgen metabolite present in adults. It has been found in the urine of infants as well. Beta-Cortol is the 5b enantiomer of beta-allocortol. Beta-cortol levels are significantly higher in premenopausal women with leiomyomas than in age-matched healthy premenopausal control women. Uterine leiomyomas are tumors closely associated with estrogen levels and it has been noted that the development of leiomyomas depends on the condition of menstruation, perimenopause and pregnancy. (PMID: 14698830  , 14616886  , 14643447  , 15635046  , 14709852  ).|
HMDB0002721::Modified nucleotide found at position 37 in tRNA 3' to the anticodon of eukaryotic tRNA. Shown that sequences are forced to adopt a hairpin conformation if one of the central 6 nt is replaced by the corresponding methylated nucleotide, such as 1-methylguanosine. In Vivo synthesis: Inosine-37 in tRNA is synthesised by a hydrolytic deamination-type reaction, catalysed by distinct tRNA:adenosine deaminases.|
HMDB0002189::N8-Acetylspermidine is a polyamine. The polyamines, found in virtually all living organisms, are a ubiquitous group of compounds that appear to play a vital role in many cellular processes involving nucleic acids including cell growth and differentiation. The polyamines, found in virtually all living organisms, are a ubiquitous group of compounds that appear to play a vital role in many cellular processes involving nucleic acids including cell growth and differentiation. Acetylation on the terminal nitrogen adjacent to the 4-carbon chain produces N8-acetylspermidine. This reaction is catalyzed by spermidine N8-acetyltransferase and does not result in the conversion of spermidine to putrescine but, instead, the product undergoes deacetylation. This acetyltransferase appears to be associated with chromatin in the cell nucleus and has been reported to be the same as (or related to) the enzyme(s) responsible for histone acetylation. N8-Acetylspermidine does not accumulate in tissues but rather appears to be rapidly deacetylated back to spermidine by a relatively specific cytosolic deacetylase, N8-acetylspermidine deacetylase. The function of this N8-acetylation/deacetylation pathway in cellular processes is not understood clearly, but several observations have suggested a role in cell growth and differentiation. (PMID: 12093478  ).|
HMDB0001276::N1-Acetylspermidine is a polyamine. In many organisms, polyamines originate from L-ornithine and methionine. Ornithine decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.17), a key enzyme in polyamine metabolism, decarboxylates L-ornithine to yield putrescine which is then converted to higher polyamines spermidine and spermine by successive addition of aminopropyl groups derived from decarboxylated S-adenosylmethionine. Aliphatic polyamines occur ubiquitously in organisms and have important functions in the stabilization of cell membranes, biosynthesis of informing molecules, cell growth and differentiation, as well as adaptation to osmotic, ionic, pH and thermal stress. These cationic substances are implicated in multiple functions, therefore it is not surprising that intracellular levels of polyamines are regulated by different mechanisms. The inhibition of polyamine metabolism has important pharmacological and therapeutic implications for the control of physiological processes, reproduction, cancer and parasitic diseases. Recent reports have suggested the idea that parasites with an high turnover of Ornithine Decarboxilase (ODC) are resistant to Difluoromethyl ornithine (DFMO, the irreversible inhibitor of ornithine decarboxylase) because they always contain a fraction of newly synthesized and active enzyme, therefore not DFMO inhibited, sufficient to produce small amounts of putrescine rapidly converted into spermidine, which can support protozoan proliferation. DFMO has proved to be curative in trypanosomiasis, coccidiosis, and certain other protozoan infections. (PMID: 15490259  ).|
HMDB0014447::Tranexamic Acid is only found in individuals that have used or taken this drug. It is an antifibrinolytic hemostatic used in severe hemorrhage. [PubChem]Tranexamic acid competitively inhibits activation of plasminogen (via binding to the kringle domain), thereby reducing conversion of plasminogen to plasmin (fibrinolysin), an enzyme that degrades fibrin clots, fibrinogen, and other plasma proteins, including the procoagulant factors V and VIII. Tranexamic acid also directly inhibits plasmin activity, but higher doses are required than are needed to reduce plasmin formation.|
HMDB0013809::(E)-2-octenal is a flavoring ingredient for improving the aroma and flavor of cherries, dairy products, nuts, and meat. It is a colorless to slightly yellow liquid with fresh cucumber, fragrant herbs, banana leaf-like flavor. The boiling point of (E)-2-octenal (CAS 2548-87-0) is 84-86 degree Celcius, and when heated to decomposition it emits acrid smoke and irritating vapours.|
HMDB0037051::1-Isopropyl-3-methylbenzene, also known as 1-methyl-3-isopropylbenzene or 3-isopropyltoluene, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as cumenes. These are aromatic compounds containing a prop-2-ylbenzene moiety. 1-Isopropyl-3-methylbenzene exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. 1-Isopropyl-3-methylbenzene has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, 1-isopropyl-3-methylbenzene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). Outside of the human body, 1-isopropyl-3-methylbenzene can be found in blackcurrant, fruits, and sweet basil. This makes 1-isopropyl-3-methylbenzene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0031265::1-Nonanol is found in citrus. 1-Nonanol is widespread in nature. 1-Nonanol occurs in oils of orange, citronella and lemon. Also found in cheese, prickly pears and bread. 1-Nonanol is a flavouring agent.1-Nonanol is a straight chain fatty alcohol with nine carbon atoms and the molecular formula CH3(CH2)8OH. It is a colorless to slightly yellow liquid with a citrus odor similar to citronella oil|
HMDB0059810::m-Xylene, also known as 1,3-xylene or m-xylol, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as m-xylenes. These are aromatic compounds that contain a m-xylene moiety, which is a monocyclic benzene carrying exactly two methyl groups at the 1- and 3-positions. m-Xylene exists as a liquid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. m-Xylene has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and blood. Within the cell, m-xylene is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). m-Xylene exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. m-Xylene is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, 2,4,6-trinitroxylene, musk xylene, and 3,5-xylenol. m-Xylene is a plastic tasting compound that can be found in black walnut, parsley, and safflower. This makes m-xylene a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products. m-Xylene is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0041971::1,4-Dichlorobenzene (p-DCB, para-dichlorobenzene) is an organic compound with the formula C6H4Cl2. This colorless solid has a strong odor. In terms of its structure, the molecule consists of two chlorine atoms substituted for hydrogen at opposing sites on a benzene ring. p-DCB is used a pesticide and a deodorant, most familiarly in mothballs in which it is a replacement for the more traditional naphthalene. p-DCB is also used as a precursor in the production of the polymer poly(p-phenylene sulfide).|
HMDB0035226::2-Acetyl-5-methylfuran is found in alcoholic beverages. 2-Acetyl-5-methylfuran is isolated from raisins, roasted onion, French fried potato, tomato, smoked fatty fish, cooked beef, fried cured pork, beer, spirits, black tea, wild rice, squid and coffee aroma. 2-Acetyl-5-methylfuran is organoleptic and flavouring agent.|
HMDB0034233::(e)-2-Butenal, also known as (2E)-but-2-enal or crotonal, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as enals. These are an alpha,beta-unsaturated aldehyde of general formula RC=C-CH=O in which the aldehydic C=O function is conjugated to a C=C triple bond at the alpha,beta position (e)-2-Butenal exists as a solid, soluble (in water), and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa) (e)-2-Butenal has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, (e)-2-butenal is primarily located in the cytoplasm (e)-2-Butenal is a flower tasting compound that can be found in fruits, garden tomato, and potato. This makes (e)-2-butenal a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0061892::2-Heptene belongs to the class of organic compounds known as unsaturated aliphatic hydrocarbons. These are aliphatic Hydrocarbons that contains one or more unsaturated carbon atoms. These compounds contain one or more double or triple bonds. 2-Heptene is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. 2-Heptene has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. |
HMDB0040272::2-Butylfuran belongs to the class of organic compounds known as heteroaromatic compounds. Heteroaromatic compounds are compounds containing an aromatic ring where a carbon atom is linked to an hetero atom. 2-Butylfuran is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. 2-Butylfuran has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, 2-butylfuran is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP). 2-Butylfuran exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. 2-Butylfuran has a mild, sweet, and fruity taste.|
HMDB0031491::, also known as 2,3-hexandione or acetyl butyryl, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as alpha-diketones. These are organic compounds containing two ketone groups on two adjacent carbon atoms. Thus, is considered to be an oxygenated hydrocarbon lipid molecule. is soluble (in water) and an extremely weak acidic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and saliva. Within the cell, is primarily located in the cytoplasm. exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. is a sweet, butter, and caramel tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as pulses, alcoholic beverages, coffee and coffee products, and mollusks. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0035289::2,5-Dimethylpyrazine is found in cereals and cereal products. 2,5-Dimethylpyrazine is used as flavour additive and odorant in foods. 2,5-Dimethylpyrazine is present in asparagus, wheat bread, crispbread, Swiss cheeses, black or green tea, soya, malt, raw shrimp and squid.|
HMDB0032972::2,6-Dimethylpyridine is found in alcoholic beverages. 2,6-Dimethylpyridine is present in bread, tea and whisky. 2,6-Dimethylpyridine is a flavouring agent 2,6-Lutidine is a natural heterocyclic aromatic organic compound. It has been isolated from the basic fraction of coal tar and from bone oil. It is a dimethyl substituted derivative of pyridine.|
HMDB0031482::, also known as aethylbutylketon or eptan-3-one, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as ketones. These are organic compounds in which a carbonyl group is bonded to two carbon atoms R2C=O (neither R may be a hydrogen atom). Ketones that have one or more alpha-hydrogen atoms undergo keto-enol tautomerization, the tautomer being an enol. Thus, is considered to be an oxygenated hydrocarbon lipid molecule. exists as a liquid, slightly soluble (in water), and an extremely weak basic (essentially neutral) compound (based on its pKa). has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, is primarily located in the cytoplasm. can be converted into methadone. is a fatty, fruity, and green tasting compound that can be found in spearmint. This makes a potential biomarker for the consumption of this food product.|
HMDB0036100::3,7-Dimethyl-1,6-octadien-3-ol is found in allspice. 3,7-Dimethyl-1,6-octadien-3-ol is a flavouring agent. 3,7-Dimethyl-1,6-octadien-3-ol is widespread natural occurrence as the optically active and racemic forms in over 200 essential oils. Also present in numerous fruits.Linalool is a naturally occurring terpene alcohol chemical found in many flowers and spice plants with many commercial applications, the majority of which are based on its pleasant scent (floral, with a touch of spiciness). Over 200 species of plants produce linalool, mainly from the families Lamiaceae (mints, scented herbs), Lauraceae (laurels, cinnamon, rosewood), and Rutaceae (citrus fruits), but also birch trees and other plants, from tropical to boreal climate zones. It has also been found in some fungi. Linalool has two stereoisomers: licareol is (R)-linalool and coriandrol is (S)-(+)-linalool. (Wikipedia|
HMDB0029638::4-Methylbenzaldehyde is found in alcoholic beverages. 4-Methylbenzaldehyde is a component of *FEMA 3068* together with the o- and m-isomers. 4-Methylbenzaldehyde is a flavouring ingredient. Methylbenzaldehydes are present in roasted nuts, cooked beef, cider, tomato, coffee, tea and elderberry juic|
HMDB0061869::Acetonitrile is the chemical compound with the formula CH3CN. This colourless liquid is the simplest organic nitrile . It is produced mainly as a byproduct of acrylonitrile manufacture. It is used as a polar aprotic solvent in organic synthesis and in the purification of butadiene.|
HMDB0003119::Benzyl Alcohol is a colorless liquid with a sharp burning taste and slight odor. It is used as a local anesthetic and to reduce pain associated with Lidocaine injection. Also, it is used in the manufacture of other benzyl compounds, as a pharmaceutical aid, and in perfumery and flavoring. Benzyl Alcohol is an aromatic alcohol used in a wide variety of cosmetic formulations as a fragrance component, preservative, solvent, and viscosity-decreasing agent. Benzyl Alcohol is metabolized to Benzoic Acid, which reacts with glycine and excreted as hippuric acid in the human body. Acceptable daily intakes were established by the World Health Organization at 5 mg/kg for Benzyl Alcohol. No adverse effects of benzyl alcohol have been seen in chronic exposure animal studies using rats and mice.| Effects of Benzyl Alcohol in chronic exposure animal studies are limited to reduced feed intake and reduced growth. Some differences have been noted in one reproductive toxicity study using mice, but these were limited to lower maternal body weights and decreased mean litter weights. Another study also noted that fetal weight was decreased compared to controls, but a third study showed no differences between control and benzyl alcohol-treated groups. Benzyl Alcohol has been associated with an increased number of resorptions and malformations in hamsters, but there have been no reproductive or developmental toxicity findings in studies using mice and rats. Genotoxicity tests for benzyl alcohol are mostly negative, but there were some assays that were positive. Carcinogenicity studies, however, were negative.| Clinical data indicates that benzyl alcohol can produce nonimmunologic contact urticaria and nonimmunologic immediate contact reactions, characterized by the appearance of wheals, erythema, and pruritis. 5% benzyl alcohol can elicit a reaction. Benzyl Alcohol is not a sensitizer at 10%. Benzyl Alcohol could be used safely at concentrations up to 5%, but that manufacturers should consider the nonimmunologic phenomena when using benzyl alcohol in cosmetic formulations designed for infants and children. Additionally, Benzyl Alcohol is considered safe up to 10% for use in hair dyes. The limited body exposure, the duration of use, and the frequency of use are considered in concluding that the nonimmunologic reactions would not be a concern. Because of the wide variety of product types in which benzyl alcohol may be used, it is likely that inhalation may be a route of exposure. The available safety tests are not considered sufficient to support the safety of benzyl alcohol in formulations where inhalation is a route of exposure. Inhalation toxicity data are needed to complete the safety assessment of benzyl alcohol where inhalation can occur. (PMID: 11766131  ).|
HMDB0040726::Z-Linalool oxide, also known as cis-linalyl oxide, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as tetrahydrofurans. These are heterocyclic compounds containing a saturated, aliphatic, five-membered ring where a carbon is replaced by an oxygen. Z-Linalool oxide is slightly soluble (in water) and a very weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). Z-Linalool oxide has been primarily detected in feces. Within the cell, Z-linalool oxide is primarily located in the cytoplasm. Z-Linalool oxide exists in all eukaryotes, ranging from yeast to humans. Z-Linalool oxide is a sweet, earthy, and floral tasting compound that can be found in a number of food items such as coriander, tarragon, tea, and black elderberry. This makes Z-linalool oxide a potential biomarker for the consumption of these food products.|
HMDB0031548::Dichloromethane is used as an extraction solvent in the preparation of decaffeinated coffee, hop extracts and spice oleoresins. Diluent for colour additives and inks for marking fruit and vegetables The output of these processes is a mixture of methyl chloride, dichloromethane, chloroform, and carbon tetrachloride. These compounds are separated by distillation|
HMDB0029751::Naphthalene is found in black walnut. Naphthalene is found in many essential oils.Naphthalene is an organic compound with formula C10H8. It is a white crystalline solid with a characteristic odor that is detectable at concentrations as low as 0.08 ppm by mass. Trace amounts of naphthalene are produced by magnolias and specific types of deer, as well as the Formosan subterranean termite. Some strains of the endophytic fungus Muscodor albus produce naphthalene among a range of volatile organic compounds, while Muscodor vitigenus produces naphthalene almost exclusively (Wikipedia|
HMDB0059924::p-Xylene is an aromatic hydrocarbon based on benzene with two methyl substituents with the chemical formula C8H10 or C6H4(CH3)2. The “p” stands for para, identifying the location of the methyl groups as across from one another. (Wikipedia)|
HMDB0000926::Pyridine is a clear liquid with an odor that is sour, putrid, and fish-like. It is a relatively simple heterocyclic aromatic organic compound that is structurally related to benzene, with one CH group in the six-membered ring replaced by a nitrogen atom. Pyridine is obtained from crude coal tar or is synthesized from acetaldehyde, formaldehyde and ammonia. Pyridine is often used as a denaturant for antifreeze mixtures, for ethyl alcohol, for fungicides, and as a dyeing aid for textiles. It is a harmful substance if inhaled, ingested or absorbed through the skin. In particular, it is known to reduce male fertility and is considered carcinogenic. Common symptoms of acute exposure to pyridine include: headache, coughing, asthmatic breathing, laryngitis, nausea and vomiting. -- Wikipedia.|
HMDB0014389::Mesalazine is only found in individuals that have used or taken this drug. It is an anti-inflammatory agent, structurally related to the salicylates, which is active in inflammatory bowel disease. It is considered to be the active moiety of sulphasalazine. (From Martindale, The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 30th ed)Although the mechanism of action of mesalazine is not fully understood, it appears to be topical rather than systemic. Mucosal production of arachidonic acid metabolites, both through the cyclooxygenase pathways, i.e., prostanoids, and through the lipoxygenase pathways, i.e., leukotrienes and hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids, is increased in patients with chronic inflammatory bowel disease, and it is possible that mesalazine diminishes inflammation by blocking cyclooxygenase and inhibiting prostaglandin production in the colon.|
HMDB0060602::N-acetyl-5-aminosalicylic acid is a metabolite of mesalazine. Mesalazine, also known as mesalamine or 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA), is an anti-inflammatory drug used to treat inflammatory bowel disease, such as ulcerative colitis and mild-to-moderate Crohn's disease. Mesalazine is a bowel-specific aminosalicylate drug that acts locally in the gut and has its predominant actions there, thereby having few systemic side effects. (Wikipedia)|
HMDB0000910::Tridecylic acid, also known as N-tridecanoate or C13:0, belongs to the class of organic compounds known as long-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 13 and 21 carbon atoms. Tridecylic acid exists as a solid and is considered to be practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral. Tridecylic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces, saliva, and urine. Within the cell, tridecylic acid is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP), cytoplasm and adiposome. Tridecylic acid is also a parent compound for other transformation products, including but not limited to, 2-hydroxytridecanoic acid, 13-hydroxytridecanoic acid, and (12R)-12-hydroxytridecanoic acid. Tridecylic acid is a potentially toxic compound.|
HMDB0004259::Acetyl-N-formyl-5-methoxykynurenamine (AFMK) results from the oxidative cleavage of the pyrrole ring during melatonin oxidation by myeloperoxidase (MPO), a superoxide anion (O)-dependent reaction. AFMK is also expected to be formed from oxidation catalyzed by the unspecific enzyme indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), found in a variety of cell types including monocyte/macrophage lineages. MPO- and IDO-catalyzed melatonin oxidation has the requirement of O in common, a species formed in large amounts in inflammatory conditions. The non-enzymatic formation of AFMK can also be expected by its direct reaction with highly reactive oxygen species, such as hydroxyl radical and singlet oxygen. Thus, we assume that AFMK is a product formed in a route of melatonin metabolism, especially active in inflammation. As AFMK is biologically more active on leukocytes than melatonin, the metabolizing of melatonin to AFMK at inflammatory sites possibly plays a role in immunomodulation. AFMK is found in the CSF of patients with meningitis, and in some samples at a remarkably high concentration. AFMK was also found in some patients to exceed the concentration of melatonin normally found in serum (PMID: 16150112  ).|
HMDB0010730::3-Oxo-tetradecanoic acid is an intermediate in fatty acid biosynthesis. Specifically, 3-Oxo-tetradecanoic acid is converted from Malonic acid via three enzymes; 3-oxoacyl-[acyl-carrier-protein] synthase, fatty-acid Synthase and beta-ketoacyl -acyl-carrier-protein synthase II. (EC:2.3.1.41, E.C: 2.3.1.85, 2.3.1.179). In humans fatty acids are predominantly formed in the liver and adipose tissue, and mammary glands during lactation.|
HMDB0011500::LysoPE(14:0/0:0) is a lysophosphatidylethanolamine or a lysophospholipid. The term 'lysophospholipid' (LPL) refers to any phospholipid that is missing one of its two O-acyl chains. Thus, LPLs have a free alcohol in either the sn-1 or sn-2 position. The prefix 'lyso-' comes from the fact that lysophospholipids were originally found to be hemolytic however it is now used to refer generally to phospholipids missing an acyl chain. LPLs are usually the result of phospholipase A-type enzymatic activity on regular phospholipids such as phosphatidylcholine or phosphatidic acid, although they can also be generated by the acylation of glycerophospholipids or the phosphorylation of monoacylglycerols. Some LPLs serve important signaling functions such as lysophosphatidic acid. Lysophosphatidylethanolamines (LPEs) can function as plant growth regulators with several diverse uses. (LPEs) are approved for outdoor agricultural use to accelerate ripening and improve the quality of fresh produce. They are also approved for indoor use to preserve stored crops and commercial cut flowers. As a breakdown product of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), LPE is present in cells of all organisms.|
HMDB0011502::LysoPE(15:0/0:0) is a lysophosphatidylethanolamine or a lysophospholipid. The term 'lysophospholipid' (LPL) refers to any phospholipid that is missing one of its two O-acyl chains. Thus, LPLs have a free alcohol in either the sn-1 or sn-2 position. The prefix 'lyso-' comes from the fact that lysophospholipids were originally found to be hemolytic however it is now used to refer generally to phospholipids missing an acyl chain. LPLs are usually the result of phospholipase A-type enzymatic activity on regular phospholipids such as phosphatidylcholine or phosphatidic acid, although they can also be generated by the acylation of glycerophospholipids or the phosphorylation of monoacylglycerols. Some LPLs serve important signaling functions such as lysophosphatidic acid. Lysophosphatidylethanolamines (LPEs) can function as plant growth regulators with several diverse uses. (LPEs) are approved for outdoor agricultural use to accelerate ripening and improve the quality of fresh produce. They are also approved for indoor use to preserve stored crops and commercial cut flowers. As a breakdown product of phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), LPE is present in cells of all organisms.|
HMDB0012798::5'-carboxy-alpha-tocopherol is a dehydrogenation carboxylate product of 5'-hydroxy-a-tocopherol by an unidentified microsomal enzyme(s) probably via an aldehyde intermediate. The tocopherols ( a-tocopherol , b-tocopherol ,r-tocopherol and d-tocopherol ) and their corresponding tocotrienols are synthesized by plants and have vitamin E antixoidant activity (see pathway vitamin E biosynthesis ). They differ in the number and location of methyl groups on the chromanol ring. The naturally occurring form of a-tocopherol is (2R,4'R,8'R)-a-tocopherol (synonym (R,R,R)-a-tocopherol). Synthetic a-tocopherols are a racemic mixture of eight different R and S stereoisomers. Only the 2R forms are recognized as meeting human requirements.| The in vivo function of vitamin E is to scavenge peroxyl radicals via its phenolic (chromanol) hydroxyl group, thus protecting lipids against free radical-catalyzed peroxidation. The tocopheryl radical formed can then be reduced by reductants such as L-ascorbate. Other major products of a-tocopherol oxidation include α-tocopherylquinone and epoxy-a-tocopherols. The metabolites a-tocopheronic acid and its lactone, known as the Simon metabolites, are generally believed to be artefacts. In addition to these oxidation products, the other major class of tocopherol metabolites is the carboxyethyl-hydroxychromans.These metabolites are produced in significant amounts in response to excess vitamin E ingestion. Vitamin E is fat-soluble and its utilization requires intestinal fat absorption mechanisms. It is secreted from the intestine into the lymphatic system in chylomicrons which subsequently enter the plasma. Lipolysis of these chylomicrons can result in delivery of vitamin E to tissues, transfer to high-density lipoproteins (and subsequently to other lipoproteins via the phospholipid exchange protein), or retention in chylomicron remnants. These remnants are taken up by the liver. Natural (R,R,R)-α-tocopherol and synthetic 2R-α-tocopherols are then preferentially secreted from the liver into plasma as a result of the specificity of the α-tocopherol transfer protein. This protein, along with the metabolism of excess vitamin E in the liver and excretion into urine and bile, mediate the supply of a-tocopherol in plasma and tissues.|
HMDB0013627::Cervonoyl ethanolamide is a N-acylethanolamine. N-acylethanolamines (NAEs) constitute a class of lipid compounds naturally present in both animal and plant membranes as constituents of the membrane-bound phospholipid, N-acylphosphatidylethanolamine (NAPE). NAPE is composed of a third fatty acid moiety linked to the amino head group of the commonly occurring membrane phospholipid, phosphatidylethanolamine. NAEs are released from NAPE by phospholipase D-type hydrolases in response to a variety of stimuli. Transient NAE release and accumulation has been attributed a variety of biological activities, including neurotransmission, membrane protection, and immunomodulation in animals. N-oleoylethanolamine is an inhibitor of the sphingolipid signaling pathway, via specific ceramidase inhibition (ceramidase converts ceramide to sphingosine). N-oleoylethanolamine blocks the effects of TNF- and arachidonic acid on intracellular Ca concentration. (PMID: 12692337  , 12056855  , 12560208  , 11997249  ).|
HMDB0013639::8-[(Aminomethyl)sulfanyl]-6-sulfanyloctanoic acid belongs to the class of organic compounds known as medium-chain fatty acids. These are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 4 and 12 carbon atoms. 8-[(Aminomethyl)sulfanyl]-6-sulfanyloctanoic acid is considered to be a practically insoluble (in water) and relatively neutral molecule. 8-[(Aminomethyl)sulfanyl]-6-sulfanyloctanoic acid has been detected in multiple biofluids, such as feces and urine. Within the cell, 8-[(aminomethyl)sulfanyl]-6-sulfanyloctanoic acid is primarily located in the membrane (predicted from logP), mitochondria, cytoplasm and adiposome. 8-[(Aminomethyl)sulfanyl]-6-sulfanyloctanoic acid participates in a number of enzymatic reactions. In particular, 8-[(Aminomethyl)sulfanyl]-6-sulfanyloctanoic acid can be biosynthesized from glycine and (R)-lipoic acid through its interaction with the enzyme glycine dehydrogenase [decarboxylating], mitochondrial. Furthermore, Tetrahydrofolic acid and 8-[(aminomethyl)sulfanyl]-6-sulfanyloctanoic acid can be converted into dihydrolipoate and 5,10-methylene-THF through the action of the enzyme aminomethyltransferase, mitochondrial. Furthermore, Tetrahydrofolic acid and 8-[(aminomethyl)sulfanyl]-6-sulfanyloctanoic acid can be converted into dihydrolipoate and 5,10-methylene-THF through its interaction with the enzyme aminomethyltransferase, mitochondrial. Finally, 8-[(Aminomethyl)sulfanyl]-6-sulfanyloctanoic acid can be biosynthesized from glycine and (R)-lipoic acid through its interaction with the enzyme glycine dehydrogenase [decarboxylating], mitochondrial. In humans, 8-[(aminomethyl)sulfanyl]-6-sulfanyloctanoic acid is involved in the glycine and serine metabolism pathway. 8-[(Aminomethyl)sulfanyl]-6-sulfanyloctanoic acid is also involved in several metabolic disorders, some of which include the NON ketotic hyperglycinemia pathway, dimethylglycine dehydrogenase deficiency, 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase deficiency, and the hyperglycinemia, non-ketotic pathway.|
HMDB0029106::Tyrosyl-Hydroxyproline is a dipeptide composed of tyrosine and hydroxyproline. It is an incomplete breakdown product of protein digestion or protein catabolism. Some dipeptides are known to have physiological or cell-signaling effects although most are simply short-lived intermediates on their way to specific amino acid degradation pathways following further proteolysis. This dipeptide has not yet been identified in human tissues or biofluids and so it is classified as an 'Expected' metabolite.|
HMDB0000499::5-Tetradecenoic acid, also known as physeterate or physeteric acid, is a member of the class of compounds known as long-chain fatty acids. Long-chain fatty acids are fatty acids with an aliphatic tail that contains between 13 and 21 carbon atoms. Thus, 5-tetradecenoic acid is considered to be a fatty acid lipid molecule. 5-tetradecenoic acid is practically insoluble (in water) and a weakly acidic compound (based on its pKa). 5-tetradecenoic acid can be found primarily in blood. Within the cell, 5-tetradecenoic acid is primarily located in the cytoplasm and in the membrane. It can also be found in the extracellular space. Moreover, 5-tetradecenoic acid is found in plasma of patients with very long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency (PMID 7586519  ), a genetic disorder. 5-Tetradecenoic acid is an intermediate of unsaturated fatty acid metabolism found in plasma of patients with very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency (PMID 7586519  ).|
HMDB0006317::trans-Hexadec-2-enoyl carnitine is an acylcarnitine. Numerous disorders have been described that lead to disturbances in energy production and in intermediary metabolism in the organism which are characterized by the production and excretion of unusual acylcarnitines. A mutation in the gene coding for carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase or the OCTN2 transporter aetiologically causes a carnitine deficiency that results in poor intestinal absorption of dietary L-carnitine, its impaired reabsorption by the kidney and, consequently, in increased urinary loss of L-carnitine. Determination of the qualitative pattern of acylcarnitines can be of diagnostic and therapeutic importance. The betaine structure of carnitine requires special analytical procedures for recording. The ionic nature of L-carnitine causes a high water solubility which decreases with increasing chain length of the ester group in the acylcarnitines. Therefore, the distribution of L-carnitine and acylcarnitines in various organs is defined by their function and their physico-chemical properties as well. High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) permits screening for free and total carnitine, as well as complete quantitative acylcarnitine determination, including the long-chain acylcarnitine profile. (PMID: 17508264  , Monatshefte fuer Chemie (2005), 136(8), 1279-1291., Int J Mass Spectrom. 1999;188:39-52.).|
